[Amit Varma]: How should we think about health? Well, here's how I think of my personal health. I don't
[Amit Varma]: sleep enough. I don't exercise enough. I eat the wrong food. In other words, just because
[Amit Varma]: I feel okay now, I act as if I don't need to do anything to make sure I feel okay later.
[Amit Varma]: But one day, I'll fall ill and then I'll be at my doctor's clinic saying kindly give medicines.
[Amit Varma]: I will be disciplined in taking them. I care about my health. This is the wrong approach.
[Amit Varma]: My thinking about my personal health care is flawed, and I will only realize it when
[Amit Varma]: I fall ill. And then if I get better, I will forget it again. And that's our nation's attitude
[Amit Varma]: towards health care, especially if we are among the urbanized English speaking elites.
[Amit Varma]: We feel okay most of the time. And when we don't, we have access to fancy doctors and
[Amit Varma]: fancier hospitals. We don't spend time worrying about our health care system. And yet, we
[Amit Varma]: are now in the middle of a crisis where we can't ignore it anymore. You could say as
[Amit Varma]: a nation, as a democracy, we are suffering the impact of a chronic disease that we had
[Amit Varma]: earlier normalized. And it is now making us suffer. COVID-19 has made it clear that our
[Amit Varma]: health care system is broken. As much as that, it has also revealed that our dysfunctional
[Amit Varma]: state is a greater crisis than COVID-19. In fact, our dysfunctional state is a chronic
[Amit Varma]: crisis that we have been suffering from for over 70 years. Now maybe fixing the state
[Amit Varma]: is beyond us. But we must ask ourselves, how can we fix our health care system? We need
[Amit Varma]: to do it. And we need to start now before COVID-19 recedes, and we slip back into our
[Amit Varma]: bubbles of denial. And before we fix it, we need to understand it.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma. Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest
[Amit Varma]: today is a brilliant economist, Karthik Muralidharan. Karthik had last appeared on episode 185 of
[Amit Varma]: this show, which as of now is the third most downloaded episode of mine. It was a comprehensive
[Amit Varma]: discussion on our education system. And we had promised each other that we would one
[Amit Varma]: day have a similar long chat about our health care system, another subject that Karthik
[Amit Varma]: has studied deeply. Well, that day has come when the subject feels so immediate and visceral,
[Amit Varma]: and not just something that academics and policy monks should care about. Now, just
[Amit Varma]: as that earlier episode was titled fixing Indian education, I thought of calling this
[Amit Varma]: one fixing Indian health care. But we both agreed that it seems almost arrogant to say
[Amit Varma]: that we know how to fix this. This is such a deep problem that we first need to try and
[Amit Varma]: understand it. Thus this title, understanding Indian health care. Now it so happens that
[Amit Varma]: Karthik is writing a book about fixing the Indian state. And he sent me the early draft
[Amit Varma]: of his chapter on health care. I can't share a chapter with you. But the show notes contain
[Amit Varma]: many, many of the papers that are mentioned there, which give a foundational understanding
[Amit Varma]: of our health care system. I encourage you don't just listen to this episode. Also go
[Amit Varma]: through those papers. We all have a stake in this thing. Karthik and I have also agreed
[Amit Varma]: in a few weeks from now to do another episode on federalism in India. Now one thing I found
[Amit Varma]: delightful about this particular conversation is that it felt like it was part of a larger
[Amit Varma]: ongoing conversation spanning many episodes of mine. Karthik wrote to me and offered to
[Amit Varma]: have this conversation after listening to my episode on vaccines with Ajay Shah. And
[Amit Varma]: during this conversation, he kept quoting previous guests such as Ashwin Mahesh and
[Amit Varma]: Anirban Mapatra, adding to their insights and carrying their arguments forward. This
[Amit Varma]: is the best thing about the seen and the unseen, as regular listeners would have realized.
[Amit Varma]: And by the way, Karthik and I disagreed on quite a few things in this episode, such as
[Amit Varma]: a high petrol prices because of how much the government taxes, which I feel is a bad thing.
[Amit Varma]: But Karthik feels is a good thing. And that actually illustrates another fundamental disagreement
[Amit Varma]: between us. He has faith that the dysfunctional state can be reformed. And while I would love
[Amit Varma]: all efforts towards that to continue, I feel that we must stop depending on the state and
[Amit Varma]: try to figure out how society can solve its own problems. But that's a larger ongoing
[Amit Varma]: conversation. And what we both agreed on is that we need to understand this problem first
[Amit Varma]: before we think about how to solve it. And some of Karthik's insights in this episode
[Amit Varma]: are just stunning. And so is the singing. Yes, my friends, we have a little Antakshari
[Amit Varma]: session at the end of this episode. And Karthik sings a couple of songs for us. And why not?
[Amit Varma]: Karthik is the best medicine. But before we get there, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more? I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading
[Amit Varma]: habit. This means that I read more books, but I also read more long form articles and
[Amit Varma]: essays. There's a world of knowledge available through the internet. But the problem we all
[Amit Varma]: face is how do we navigate this knowledge? How do we know what to read? How do we put
[Amit Varma]: the right incentives in place for us? Well, I discovered one way. A couple of friends
[Amit Varma]: of mine run this awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com, which aims
[Amit Varma]: to help people up level themselves by reading more. A few months ago, I signed up for one
[Amit Varma]: of their programs called the Daily Reader. Every day for six months, they sent me a long
[Amit Varma]: form article to read. The subjects covered went from machine learning to mythology to
[Amit Varma]: mental models to even marmalade. This helped me build a habit of reading. At the end of
[Amit Varma]: every day, I understood the world a little better than I did before. So if you want to
[Amit Varma]: build your reading habit, head on over to CTQ Compounds and check out their Daily Reader.
[Amit Varma]: The next batch starts on Saturday, May 23rd. And if you're listening to this after that
[Amit Varma]: date, they keep having regular batches. They also have another great program called Future
[Amit Varma]: Stack, which helps you stay up to date with ideas, skills and mental models that will
[Amit Varma]: help you stay relevant in the future. Future Stack batches start every Saturday. Also check
[Amit Varma]: out their Social Capital Compound, which helps you master social media. What's more, on all
[Amit Varma]: of these, you get a discount of a whopping 2,500 rupees, rupees 2,500 if you use the
[Amit Varma]: discount code UNSEEN. So head on over to ctqcompounds at ctqcompounds.com and use the code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: Up-level yourself.
[Amit Varma]: care and hey that day has come in rather difficult times where health care has
[Amit Varma]: become not just some abstract issue but it's really touching everybody's lives
[Amit Varma]: here in intimate and sometimes really sad ways. Tell me how have the last few
[Amit Varma]: months been for you because you know we have of course faced this global pandemic
[Amit Varma]: and you are you know given what's happening in India you are a very close
[Amit Varma]: to it because so many people close to you must be here and getting affected at
[Amit Varma]: the same time you're far away at another intellectual level you're closer to it
[Amit Varma]: than most people because you understand all the fault lines in our health care
[Amit Varma]: system which we'll talk about as we go along and all the fault lines in the
[Amit Varma]: Indian state as we'll go along so just at a personal level how has it been for
[Amit Varma]: you you know emotionally and just in terms of your intellectual pursuits
[Amit Varma]: during this time you've also been writing this book which I can't wait to
[Amit Varma]: read on you know fixing the Indian state so just tell me a little bit about how
[Amit Varma]: it's been for you over the last few months. Yeah thanks Amit you know I think
[Guest]: the last month has been particularly difficult the most kind of difficult part
[Guest]: in some ways has been this is the longest 15 months I have not traveled to
[Guest]: India I mean normally I come every two to three months and I had gotten my
[Guest]: vaccines in early March and I was really looking forward to making a trip in fact
[Guest]: in late April early early May and that is clearly not feasible right now and
[Guest]: but more than that just seeing how this situation exploded in the past month I
[Guest]: think it's yeah it is very surreal to be kind of physically safe where I am in
[Guest]: the US but kind of mentally essentially facing as much if not all like you know
[Guest]: I mean of the stresses and turmoils of parents and friends and people who are
[Guest]: affected no it's been very very difficult I think there are obviously
[Guest]: things you can do from here in terms of donations and stuff but I'm also trying
[Guest]: to apply my mind to the few policy things that could be done and you know
[Guest]: we'll talk more about that going forward so yeah you know I think just applying
[Guest]: first principles to sensible design of healthcare systems and how do you kind
[Guest]: of use this moment of kind of reckoning almost about the weakness of our
[Guest]: healthcare systems to make the right investments going forward so you know
[Guest]: just like we say about the 91 reforms the crisis by itself was not enough to
[Guest]: have the reforms you also needed the blueprint to be ready of what you're
[Guest]: going to do and so my hope is that some of the analytical principles we'll talk
[Guest]: about today you know can be useful in kind of the nation's reactions to this
[Guest]: moment of crisis in terms of the kind of investments we'll make going forward so
[Amit Varma]: there are a couple of thoughts I have I mean obviously we want to talk about
[Amit Varma]: healthcare in general and really maybe talk a little bit about COVID at the end
[Amit Varma]: and I've had a few episodes on COVID already so I don't want to give my
[Amit Varma]: listeners too much more of that depressing subject right now but this
[Amit Varma]: kind of comes up as a pertinent question to ask you which is that there are two
[Amit Varma]: aspects of the pandemic that I've noted one the smaller one almost a trivial one
[Amit Varma]: that I chatted about with Anup Malani in the episode I did with him is that it
[Amit Varma]: inverted some of our values like some of the things which could otherwise be
[Amit Varma]: considered good suddenly worked against us like population density which we know
[Amit Varma]: is good which is why people go to cities you've got larger economic networks more
[Amit Varma]: people together more opportunities all of that but in the context of this
[Amit Varma]: pandemic that suddenly you know became a bit of a con but that's a trivial minor
[Amit Varma]: thing the larger thing that I noticed and I wrote a column about it last year
[Amit Varma]: in April when this first began stating that our greater crisis is not just
[Amit Varma]: COVID which will pass but the dysfunctional Indian state which has been in crisis
[Amit Varma]: for you know the last 70 years I think in that column I used to start I don't
[Amit Varma]: really remember it but something like 3,000 children in India die of
[Amit Varma]: starvation every day something like that I'm sure you have kind of better stats
[Amit Varma]: which to me is indicative of an ongoing disaster which we have completely
[Amit Varma]: normalized and if there's one thing that COVID has done it has shed light on a
[Amit Varma]: lot of things which we had normalized the apathy of politicians the
[Amit Varma]: dysfunctional state more than anything else the fact that the state simply
[Amit Varma]: doesn't work I mean I've always said that where the state is most required
[Amit Varma]: most justified it is absent there is effectively no rule of law in India and
[Amit Varma]: today we see that in the state of our healthcare where it was most required it
[Amit Varma]: was absent and we are see kind of seeing the consequences of that so do you think
[Amit Varma]: that there is also therefore a teachable moment in this that you can look at this
[Amit Varma]: moment and say that listen these things have been wrong forever right we haven't
[Amit Varma]: noticed them right now you are all looking at them because they are stuck
[Amit Varma]: they are in relief now this is a time where we have to therefore sit down and
[Amit Varma]: at an intellectual level analyze the problem because it's clear we can see it
[Amit Varma]: and and there is a will to do that and then think about what to do is this
[Amit Varma]: something that you've thought about and as someone who studied the inner workings
[Amit Varma]: of both the state and healthcare so deeply for so many years you know is
[Amit Varma]: that how you see it that these are things that were there and now these
[Guest]: fault lines are becoming stuck yeah no I think I've been rewriting many parts of
[Guest]: the introduction of the book I started the first chapters two years ago right
[Guest]: well before the pandemic yeah I think those of us who have been studying the
[Guest]: state have kind of known about these weaknesses and known that there was kind
[Guest]: of a gradual atrophy right I think Ajay also talked a little bit about why state
[Guest]: capacity is weaker now than it was like you know 30 40 50 years ago and frankly
[Guest]: you know I think as with all of these things it's multi-causal right and we
[Guest]: can get into that but I think in terms of the the book it almost feels like in
[Guest]: a macabre way right mean that it is kind of you know it is hopefully rises to the
[Guest]: moment right because the book is called fixing the Indian state but it you know
[Guest]: hopefully the one silver lining from all of this disaster is that people realize
[Guest]: that this is no longer something that we can allow to kind of rest so coming to
[Guest]: the different reasons for why I think we've under invested the state one of
[Guest]: the downsides of liberalization I think it was positive in almost every way
[Guest]: frightening but is it has also led to a complete seceding of the elite right mean
[Guest]: from being recipients of public services right so the Indian elites and
[Guest]: policy-making classes middle any taxpayer it pretty much avails a private
[Guest]: health care private education private security you know and private whatever
[Guest]: you can right I mean and so one way to characterize the current moment it's
[Guest]: almost like the elites and middle classes have been flying first in
[Guest]: business class in the plane that is India right mean and kind of surrounding
[Guest]: them with creature comforts but now is the moment when you realize when the
[Guest]: plane crashes it takes you all down like you know I mean regardless of what class
[Guest]: you're flying in I mean there is obviously the hyper rich or the private
[Guest]: jet types who are leaving the country right like you know but except for that
[Guest]: type I mean I think the rest of us are kind of in this plane together and
[Guest]: sometimes physically not but emotionally we are at least that's my case
[Guest]: hopefully this is one of those wake-up calls as we you know we would have
[Guest]: wanted to approach a 75th year of independence in a moment of kind of you
[Guest]: know feeling great pride at what we've achieved but you know sometimes you need
[Guest]: these kind of rude wake-up calls to really look at how hollow the state is
[Guest]: inside and build and start working on the systematic project of building up
[Guest]: you know as academics and intellectuals you know we can contribute to this
[Guest]: public discourse with a certain amount of conceptual clarity and analysis and
[Guest]: then in terms of taking it forward it's obviously the larger community of state
[Guest]: citizens and civil society so you know in that way I hope yeah so timing wise I
[Guest]: think I'm about 95% done with the first complete draft of the book so it's
[Guest]: almost done but the problem of course is that as an academic the default first
[Guest]: drafts tend to be very defensive because academic writing you write every
[Guest]: sentence assuming a peer reviewer is going to come pounce on you and saying
[Guest]: how did you say this how did you say that and so you know so in that sense
[Guest]: there's still substantial editing needed I think the first draft you've seen in
[Guest]: the chapter I've sent you has a lot of content but it's still very terse and so
[Guest]: I it'll probably another six eight months of like serious editing but I'm
[Guest]: hoping the book will be able to hit the stand sometime next year you know and
[Guest]: coincidentally leading into the 75th year of independence and hopefully like
[Guest]: you know can be part of the national conversation at that time about what we
[Amit Varma]: need to do and hopefully will remain part of the national conversation
[Amit Varma]: because I'm really looking forward to it I think it's an important book I'll come
[Amit Varma]: back to the book in a moment because I do want to talk a bit more about the
[Amit Varma]: book the process of writing it editing it almost workshopping it with your
[Amit Varma]: students as you kind of discussed before we started but another sort of question
[Amit Varma]: which is something that I've been thinking about over the last few days
[Amit Varma]: but before that a little story I'd like to share with you and my listeners and
[Amit Varma]: and this concerns a dear friend of mine both his parents got COVID and were in
[Amit Varma]: different ICUs in different hospitals in Delhi and his dad was in a hospital
[Amit Varma]: called Jaipur Golden there were 21 beds in the surgery ICU there and he was in
[Amit Varma]: that particular ICU and one night oxygen ran out 20 people died so only his dad
[Amit Varma]: survived the other 20 died and his dad was devastated because the next day
[Amit Varma]: everybody else who was a patient in the ward with him was taken away in a body
[Amit Varma]: bag and and even and his dad is still struggling in fighting it out and my
[Amit Varma]: friend's mom died a few days later though she was getting better he thought
[Amit Varma]: that she'll get better he was worried about his dad and the failure of the
[Amit Varma]: state the failure of everything our politics the state everything was so
[Amit Varma]: stark and he called me and he said that everything is broken you know it's
[Amit Varma]: up to us to fix it we have to do something and his first thought in his
[Amit Varma]: deeply emotional state was that let's do something in politics and me being the
[Amit Varma]: cynic that I am I said that nothing will happen with that because politics is a
[Amit Varma]: supply end of the political marketplace till there is nothing in demand end
[Amit Varma]: politics my question yoga and also what will happen if you become a successful
[Amit Varma]: politician you'll take charge of the state the state is dysfunctional the
[Amit Varma]: state will remain dysfunctional right that's my negative view which I've
[Amit Varma]: always held which you're kind of aware of so I said keen a year
[Amit Varma]: who's a question yoga you can't have hopes from the state what you have to do
[Amit Varma]: if these problems are to be solved they have to be solved by private individuals
[Amit Varma]: you've got to figure out ways to solve it and and like you've pointed out the
[Amit Varma]: rich and the elite and I loved your metaphor of the plane called India and
[Amit Varma]: these people are flying first in business but it's gonna crash I love
[Amit Varma]: that metaphor it's stunning but the thing is how the rich and the elite have
[Amit Varma]: been getting so far is that they've insulated themselves from the state
[Amit Varma]: right they've done their job and they've got everything worked out and now they
[Amit Varma]: realize damn it we're in the same plane together so just as they've insulated
[Amit Varma]: themselves a lot of these problems it seems to me of the state I don't have
[Amit Varma]: much hope for much happening from the state at most you make incremental
[Amit Varma]: marginal improvements now you had spoken to me in the episode where you
[Amit Varma]: give so much insight on education you said that at the level of the state when
[Amit Varma]: you're talking of that kind of scale even a marginal improvement can touch
[Amit Varma]: hundreds of thousands of millions of people in fact and therefore it's worth
[Amit Varma]: it but you know it kind of strikes me in this dark moment that we can't have hope
[Amit Varma]: from the state anymore if things get better with the state that's fine it
[Amit Varma]: will happen over time it's a long game but private individuals have to kind of
[Amit Varma]: step in and therefore the larger question which perhaps I should have
[Amit Varma]: asked after we discussed all our health care problems and so on but it seems
[Amit Varma]: like an opposite time to ask it is that when we talk of the problems in the
[Amit Varma]: Indian state in our health care for example you know and we say that of
[Amit Varma]: course the state has to do it and I agree with you there that you know the
[Amit Varma]: positive externalities if everyone is healthy are so huge that of course the
[Amit Varma]: state has to do it especially in a poor country like India but if the problem is
[Amit Varma]: not getting solved from there then private people have to step in and find
[Amit Varma]: ways to do it what are your thoughts on this I'm sorry if I rambled a bit
[Guest]: the question is absolutely spot-on and see the book for the most part is
[Guest]: addressed to senior policymakers right because that's kind of the that's the
[Guest]: audience that has the capacity in the locus standi to actually fix the state
[Guest]: but my final chapter on making it happen right mean is essentially about state
[Guest]: citizen and civil society that's kind of speaking to some of these points that
[Guest]: you're talking about and in fact that's the one chapter that's not yet written I
[Guest]: have an outline but precisely because I think it's evolving so much as we see
[Guest]: right so India does have an incredible tradition of civil society yeah you know
[Guest]: there's no shortage of very very well-minded well-motivated sincere
[Guest]: organizations trying to do a lot of good and I do think there's a lot to be a lot
[Guest]: to be said now I think the challenge is what I've seen in the space is that
[Guest]: there is a lot of distributed subscale initiatives right mean that people do in
[Guest]: different places and thinking about how do you leverage that general angst that
[Guest]: citizens have that they want to shape their surroundings for the common good
[Guest]: how do you take that and channel that enthusiasm and desire in some in a
[Guest]: constructive way so one of the big things that's happened between the last
[Guest]: podcast and this is like I have gone back and heard so many more of your
[Guest]: episodes and the lockdown has helped me in the sense that the only exercise I
[Guest]: have is long walks and you know so just as an academic always makes cross
[Guest]: references the first time I came on the show I hadn't really heard many of the
[Guest]: past ones now I have heard said make connections to a lot more of your
[Guest]: previous episodes here right but I think Ashwin had multiple episodes has said
[Guest]: this incredibly I think powerfully right so start local but instead of saying
[Guest]: that I am going to go and create some organization that does something if you
[Guest]: go sit with your local municipal council if you go sit like you know with your
[Guest]: local public health guys the guys are doing the sewage and then understand how
[Guest]: can you leverage their existence as opposed to try to do something in
[Guest]: parallel right because the thing when you do something in parallel is you have
[Guest]: so I mean this is a complete digression but I guess we've done a one-hour
[Guest]: digression in the past but you know and one of the things I'll talk about in
[Guest]: that last chapter is the there is a range of what philanthropic civil
[Guest]: society actions right there are organizations like say the Red Cross and
[Guest]: Doctors Without Borders and you know organizations and you had a show on
[Guest]: feeding the hungry right mean during the pandemic right so the the organizations
[Guest]: that do what I call immediate humanitarian relief right mean
[Guest]: alleviating human suffering okay and that's incredibly important in the
[Guest]: moment because if you can't survive that moment in the long run you're dead okay
[Guest]: so but that's very very important that's one kind of civil society right then
[Guest]: there are civil society actions that say let me come and build a school or build
[Guest]: a hospital or build something where I want to build a certain center of
[Guest]: excellence and I will cross subsidize access to the poor and you know maybe I
[Guest]: will create something that the rich are willing to pay for and there are
[Guest]: different models of that and the reason people do that is because you're
[Guest]: well-minded you want to do something institutional as opposed to just give
[Guest]: immediate relief but you know that if you were to just fund the state then you
[Guest]: have it goes into the morass of the bureaucracy and so you want to preserve
[Guest]: a certain amount of operational autonomy on your school or your hospital and that
[Guest]: you can run into high standards okay like you know so that's another model of
[Guest]: civil society right then there are models of civil society action that
[Guest]: focus a lot more on citizen awareness and building rights okay and which I
[Guest]: think is again very very important and this has to the extent that a big part
[Guest]: of the dysfunctional state is that the people it is meant to serve are often
[Guest]: not empowered enough to hold it accountable right I mean that there are
[Guest]: you know a lots to be said for that okay but I think here is the problem with
[Guest]: that again the problem with this book right now is that each chapter could
[Guest]: well be a book in itself right I mean and I have this longish academic
[Guest]: discussion of why has democracy right I mean per se not delivered for India in
[Guest]: the way that we would think it should right I mean and and and the argument is
[Guest]: quite subtle right because it's basically democracy has helped in terms
[Guest]: of expanding the ability of people to make claims on the state okay but what
[Guest]: it has not done is expand the capacity of the state to deliver on those claims
[Guest]: right I mean so when you go in in activist mode and saying I'm going to
[Guest]: kind of teach people their rights and go and ask them to kind of you know and
[Guest]: mobilize better that's useful but it very quickly hits the capacity
[Guest]: constraint of the state itself right because essentially the state has so
[Guest]: limited resources in terms of budget and bandwidth that you're just kind of
[Guest]: moving the attention from the place that's shouting less to the place that's
[Guest]: shouting more okay like I mean so the real impact will come when you can
[Guest]: expand the supply and kind of enhance the capacity of the state to deliver and
[Guest]: the state is a metaphor really for all of us right so then and again I'll
[Guest]: elaborate on this a lot more in terms of both what individuals and civil society
[Guest]: can do but my broad thinking right now is that ways in which we can leverage
[Guest]: the existing state and help it work better are going to give you the highest
[Guest]: ROI and not everybody is going to go sit at the state level and start changing
[Guest]: policy but in your local in your city council you know to the extent that that
[Guest]: itself is a collective good right I mean that could be a very very good place to
[Guest]: start so again you know this was unplanned I thought we're going to talk
[Guest]: about health and but we always have this habit of doing digressions but hopefully
[Amit Varma]: some of the digressions are great I mean my my whole modus operandi of learning
[Amit Varma]: about the world is thinking aloud and having people either you know fill in
[Amit Varma]: the gaps in my knowledge and or add to it and so on so I'll take another
[Amit Varma]: digression from this digressive digression which is that you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: that our democracy has worked in terms of making people feel empowered enough
[Amit Varma]: to make demands of the state but it hasn't worked in the other way of the
[Amit Varma]: state having capacity to actually deliver on those demands so my question
[Amit Varma]: is that the reason the state hasn't developed that capacity is also a
[Amit Varma]: question of incentives because our government is not local enough that if
[Amit Varma]: our government was incredibly local that if you know I had done an episode on I
[Amit Varma]: think a very old episode with Shruti Rajgopalan on local governance and all
[Amit Varma]: of that and she pointed out that if you just look at Maharashtra right the
[Amit Varma]: person that you vote for your municipal councillor or whoever has practically no
[Amit Varma]: power to do anything to improve your life and the person who does have all
[Amit Varma]: that power the state government and all that they don't want your vote their
[Amit Varma]: vote bank is something else so there is a disconnect between power and
[Amit Varma]: accountability and the more local that government gets the more accountability
[Amit Varma]: there is and therefore if they were accountable to you they would build the
[Guest]: capacity to serve you so what I'm going to do is I'm going to punt on this to
[Guest]: our future episode on federalism and because I think last time we said you
[Guest]: know we put teasers of multiple future episodes so we'll do health today but I
[Amit Varma]: will come back to federalism some other time okay but before we get to health
[Amit Varma]: let's kind of get to your book tell me a little bit about your book the process
[Amit Varma]: of writing it the process of kind of workshopping it and also the interesting
[Amit Varma]: the other interesting aspect which is that does teaching teach you in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that if you think about there being like I think in an earlier episode with me
[Amit Varma]: Krish Ashok had spoken about this pyramid of learning where you know your
[Amit Varma]: learning is more shallow if you just listen to something it's a little deeper
[Amit Varma]: if you read it and so on down the way and it's deepest if you teach it I think
[Amit Varma]: so in your case you mentioned that one of the ways you workshop the book was
[Amit Varma]: you also taught bits of it did the process of teaching it having to pare
[Amit Varma]: everything down to a systematic structure explain it in simple language
[Amit Varma]: answer questions on it did that deepen your understanding and in general does
[Amit Varma]: you know through your career you've obviously been an incredible
[Amit Varma]: researcher that's a matter of public record but you've also taught so what's
[Amit Varma]: the relationship there between teaching and learning there's a reason why top
[Guest]: research universities have this positive feedback loop between research and
[Guest]: teaching right so there's no question about it that the act of putting
[Guest]: together a lecture and teaching forces you to distill both what you want your
[Guest]: audience to understand and how do we know what we know I'm forgetting his
[Guest]: name now because his handle is Bhalo Manush right but like you know four
[Guest]: episodes but what Anirban mentioned right like you know that when he got to
[Guest]: the US his first exam he bombed it because all his life he'd been taught
[Guest]: how to spit out the facts as opposed to kind of ask where do those facts come
[Guest]: from right means so and I think one of the first things I say is like you know
[Guest]: the your typical rote learning system teaches you to answer questions it
[Guest]: doesn't teach you to question the answers but good teaching is all about
[Guest]: not just teaching you something but teaching you principles teaching you how
[Guest]: to think right and I remember I think in my first class one of my freshman year
[Guest]: classes I think it was a chemistry class I think being taught by I can't remember
[Guest]: it was yeah it was either a Nobel Laureate or somebody of similar
[Guest]: eminence where he kind of said he said listen you know you've gotten here
[Guest]: essentially by solving exams but you know when you get into the lab right I
[Guest]: mean there is no script right there is no script because you're by construction
[Guest]: facing a new problem right I mean and so what you're going to get is just a set
[Guest]: of principles of how you're going to approach and navigate when you're in
[Guest]: uncharted territory so I think coming back to good teaching what I did with
[Guest]: this particular book teaching was to be honest the first draft which I taught it
[Guest]: was I committed to teaching a seminar class mainly as a commitment device to
[Guest]: myself to force myself to get that first draft done because I needed to give the
[Guest]: chapters to the students while teaching it so it was a seminar class of about 16
[Guest]: to 18 students and book has 18 chapters and the class at 20 lectures so one
[Guest]: intro one conclusion and then for each lecture I would basically assign them a
[Guest]: chapter 72 hours in advance and then students would read it and submit a
[Guest]: two-page response paper before the class and I just wanted them to basically have
[Guest]: three categories of notes first is the three to five things that they learn the
[Guest]: most important things they learn from the chapter the second is what are the
[Guest]: things they're still confused about or unclear about and third is you know what
[Guest]: are the so ideas they have for strengthening the chapter whether it's
[Guest]: with facts or some students had some ideas for cartoons which you know I
[Guest]: think will be great when I get a chance or just you know other ways of making
[Guest]: the points come across better so I required that before the class so that
[Guest]: was a commitment device that the students had to do the reading so then
[Guest]: coming to effective teaching you know you the best teaching is not when you're
[Guest]: repeating the lecture but if people have done the reading and then you come from
[Guest]: the beginning with a set of questions and you're engaging in the discussion so
[Guest]: I think so that was a lot of fun now like I said the first draft of the book
[Guest]: is still very very very terse because essentially you know I'm just trying to
[Guest]: synthesize a huge body of research and get it across but what's going to take
[Guest]: a lot of time in the editing and where the student feedback will help is to say
[Guest]: okay now how do you simplify simplify simplify because my hope is that this is
[Guest]: a book that is both essentially readable for your you know airport reader and is
[Guest]: viable as a textbook in any class in kind of public policy so the challenge
[Guest]: is of course there's lots and lots and lots of books in India written kind of
[Guest]: in a more experiential way right and I think what hopefully makes this book
[Guest]: different is just how much research there is so you kind of want to convey
[Guest]: the depth of the research without necessarily getting people bogged down
[Guest]: in the details so the challenge is to then put those in footnotes perhaps
[Guest]: create like an online appendix to the entire book that will then have the
[Guest]: studies and some of the more detailed technical pieces there so that that
[Guest]: becomes an accompaniment to people who want to teach with it but that's kind of
[Guest]: where I am right now so I think I'm about 95% of the way done but like we
[Guest]: said last time you know the podcast is so much fun because I can jump and make
[Guest]: connections right because the way the book is structured is set up around a
[Guest]: set of teams and then a set of sectors and the hardest part is there is so many
[Guest]: cross connections across everything in the book but the book by construction is
[Guest]: linear right so how do you make each chapter fully self-contained while at
[Guest]: the same time not repeat what's in other places right so so in writing say an
[Guest]: education chapter health chapter right I mean if I say go back and look at this
[Guest]: chapter and state in the market about how do you regulate go back and look at
[Guest]: this chapter on measurement go back and look at this chapter on federalism you
[Guest]: know then it's kind of that's I think the hardest part I think somebody
[Guest]: transcribed our education podcast and came to about 40,000 words and so
[Guest]: sometimes I really wonder why am I wasting three years writing a book when
[Amit Varma]: I can do four podcasts with you and be done in like half a day you know no it's
[Amit Varma]: not a waste because I've read one chapter of it and I cannot wait to read
[Amit Varma]: the full book I think you know one of the things on a very serious note I'm
[Amit Varma]: glad that you're writing this book that Ajay and Vijay Kelkar wrote in service
[Amit Varma]: of the Republic I think you know these books together and hopefully there'll be
[Amit Varma]: many more like them will form a body of work which a student of public policy in
[Amit Varma]: India will or anywhere for that matter will be able to look at to get different
[Amit Varma]: sort of foundational understandings which are really important and I'm just
[Amit Varma]: thinking aloud you spoke about how you know the book is so interconnected and
[Amit Varma]: how do you express those interconnections and I've been taking
[Amit Varma]: all my notes for my episodes recently in this app called Rome research which has
[Amit Varma]: something called bi-directional linking where you know within the category of
[Amit Varma]: health I could be talking about say regulation but regulation itself is a
[Amit Varma]: massive category which has five subcategories so somewhere a subcategory
[Amit Varma]: becomes a super category and all of that shit happens and the software kind of
[Amit Varma]: allows for that but you feel like that maybe there are even more refined
[Amit Varma]: versions that are kind of happening in the future and a book is really old
[Guest]: technology I think what I like about reading books and Kindles these days is
[Guest]: because you can click to the references right so I think because the academic
[Guest]: part of me when I read something you know half the time I want to click the
[Guest]: reference and kind of you know check that so yes so having more digital books
[Guest]: that are able to just hyperlink back right mm-hmm and so in fact sometimes I
[Guest]: remember a piece of advice I got when I was in the academic job market right the
[Guest]: faculty job market is when you go for a faculty job you kind of get these half
[Guest]: an hour interviews where people ask you all kinds of questions and you have no
[Guest]: idea what they're gonna ask you so one of the things was what you train your
[Guest]: students in terms of preparing for a job interview is to kind of think about
[Guest]: their first three to five minute spiel as the front page of a web page right and
[Guest]: then but there are hyperlinks based on what people questions they're gonna ask
[Guest]: you right and so you need to be able to drill one two three four five levels
[Guest]: below so you know if you're say an econometrics candidate and you're being
[Guest]: interviewed by faculty members one is in macro one is a micro one is
[Guest]: econometrics one is in development the people outside your field will ask some
[Guest]: interesting applied questions but that might be one level deep right the people
[Guest]: in your field will go five levels deep and your challenge is not just to answer
[Guest]: but once you finish the answer to come back to the front page and kind of
[Guest]: continue the narrative without kind of getting lost in the weeds right so again
[Guest]: when you have the experience each year you read more and more and more that
[Guest]: mental filing system expands in a way that you make more and more and more of
[Guest]: the connections which is why I think after 20 years of this work I felt ready
[Guest]: to write this book right because till now most of the work as an academic is
[Guest]: writing deep individual papers and but those papers don't really make the
[Guest]: connections across what's happening and so the book is a chance to make those
[Guest]: connections now that being said the linearity of the written word is still
[Guest]: quite vexing right I mean but you know it is it is it is what it is that's
[Amit Varma]: that's absolutely kind of fascinating now tell me about how healthcare because
[Amit Varma]: you know if one goes on YouTube and searches for Karthik Muralitharan you
[Amit Varma]: know besides of course our episode together you'll also find a lot of talks
[Amit Varma]: you've given on education and that makes sense so I was trying to kind of make
[Amit Varma]: sense of this right okay he's an expert in education everyone knows this how has
[Amit Varma]: he also gotten into healthcare and then I remembered something that you told me
[Amit Varma]: in our last episode where in the introduction you spoke about how the
[Amit Varma]: first person you named as an intellectual influence on you was Amartya Sen and
[Amit Varma]: Amartya Sen of course built this capabilities framework about what
[Amit Varma]: individuals kind of need to reach their full potential and that had two prongs
[Amit Varma]: to it and one was education and one was health so it was like voila okay that's
[Amit Varma]: why so I hope I'm not being too flippant but tell me a little bit more about how
[Amit Varma]: you got into it why you got into it what your journey doing health economics was
[Amit Varma]: like because one of the things that I've kind of noticed is that the body of work
[Amit Varma]: that you have is exciting the body of work all of these other economists who
[Amit Varma]: have done all of these papers when seen as a cumulative whole is is exciting but
[Amit Varma]: each individual paper seems to be you know like a lot of kind of stodgy leg
[Amit Varma]: work and a lot of just gathering data gathering data gathering data just to
[Amit Varma]: say that you know so many people are absent you are doing such a long study
[Amit Varma]: over such a period of time when you are it's common sense they are absent only
[Amit Varma]: no so how does that process work out and in a sense you just described your
[Amit Varma]: mental process where you do a lot of little concrete micro things and then
[Amit Varma]: they begin to form a bigger picture and it's to illuminate that bigger picture
[Amit Varma]: that you know you're writing the book but how has that process of being a
[Amit Varma]: health economist been like for you why did you get into it like if you are
[Amit Varma]: interested in the big questions and how do you figure out which are the small
[Amit Varma]: things to dive into first or is it happenstance take me through a little
[Amit Varma]: bit of this because the world of academics you know both fascinates me
[Amit Varma]: and intimidates me especially now when you talk about at an interview you have
[Amit Varma]: to go five level deep and come back up and I'm like what is this you know I'm
[Amit Varma]: just a person so you would have noticed I just go deep there's no front page so
[Guest]: they tell me yeah and thanks for asking that question because the truth is I'm not
[Guest]: a health economist and I shouldn't pretend to be one right but health
[Guest]: thinking about health permeates a lot of you know my larger thinking and teaching
[Guest]: and and and some of my research as well so I think one of the things I want to
[Guest]: do for your listeners is partly because I see you know I really liked Ajay's
[Guest]: episode and I see this almost is building off on that but he said you
[Guest]: know one of the things we need is really building a community of young
[Guest]: researchers and scholars in health research community so I see part of my
[Guest]: goal here is almost excite say college goers or master students to say what a
[Guest]: wonderful you know amazing field health economics is and how much there is to do
[Guest]: so I think in terms of my own personal entry points into health they come from
[Guest]: three angles right so the first is public finance right so at heart I'm a
[Guest]: public finance economist right so my core fields are public finance and
[Guest]: development and in public finance right health ends up accounting for over 20-25
[Guest]: percent of public spending in in developed countries and which is you
[Guest]: know where I've studied and so when you take public finance in the US a big part
[Guest]: of your coursework is in fact health economics it almost becomes like a
[Guest]: subset because that's where the government's money is going this will
[Guest]: follow the money right you know so if and in fact one of my advisors so
[Guest]: Michael Kramer was one of them but the other one had three of them but the
[Guest]: other one was Marty Feldstein who's one of the you know the giants of US public
[Guest]: finance and also one of the people who kind of almost created the modern field
[Guest]: of health economics right because I think just like I was saying there used
[Guest]: to be a tradition where health was left to doctors and education was left to
[Guest]: educators but policy is fundamentally about allocating scarce resources and so
[Guest]: you kind of need an economic lens in this right so the public finance aspects
[Guest]: of why healthcare is you know occupies a large share of my mind space is a that
[Guest]: there are fundamental questions about how much public expenditure should they
[Guest]: be right I mean what should we be spending this on given that there are
[Guest]: other competing claims on public resources you know how do you increase
[Guest]: and optimize the effectiveness of your public expenditure so the unifying thread
[Guest]: in all of my research is really improving effectiveness of public
[Guest]: expenditure and like I said last time the sectors I work on our sectors where
[Guest]: the government spends over 10,000 crores a year right so education health and
[Guest]: rega PDS now ICDS so essentially improving then the effectiveness of that
[Guest]: by even 1% is going to give you a huge bang for the buck right so my first kind
[Guest]: of entry point into health economics is to public finance and I'll come back and
[Guest]: talk about what we've learned from that approach the second one is development
[Guest]: economics right so that is my core field I teach both undergrad and PhD classes
[Guest]: in development economics and you know health is a substantial part of what you
[Guest]: teach and you know going back to Amartya Sen so both health and education have
[Guest]: this unique place because they are both what we call intrinsically important and
[Guest]: instrumentally important right so the traditional economist Chicago view of
[Guest]: health and education is human capital right it's human capital because these
[Guest]: are investments that make you more productive so a healthy worker is more
[Guest]: productive a more educated worker is more productive right whereas the
[Guest]: Sennian inversion so to speak right mean is that health and education are not
[Guest]: just about making you more productive but these are the intrinsic goals of
[Guest]: development right I mean that because people care about living healthy lives
[Guest]: regardless of whether you're productive it is good to be educated and be a more
[Guest]: sophisticated consumer of the world around you regardless of whether it
[Guest]: makes you more productive right so in that sense health and education occupy
[Guest]: like a special place in development because of both this instrumental and
[Guest]: intrinsic importance so if you go look at say the Human Development Index you
[Guest]: know with Senn inspired essentially what it's doing is saying the traditional
[Guest]: measures of development are just GDP per capita but the GDP you can't eat GDP in
[Guest]: the whole point of GDP is to kind of live a better life and health and
[Guest]: education are intrinsically so important that the HDI then has a one-third weight
[Guest]: on health a one-third weight on education and a one-third weight on on
[Guest]: GDP per capita so health becomes central in development economics that way but
[Guest]: also in two other very important ways I think when you think about development
[Guest]: economics what is development economics right I mean how is development
[Guest]: economics different from just being about reducing poverty right and so the
[Guest]: conceptual key point about development economics is the idea of poverty traps
[Guest]: right the idea that people can be in initial conditions that make them so
[Guest]: vulnerable that they cannot bootstrap their way out of that initial condition
[Guest]: okay so one of the contrasts I would say between public finance and and
[Guest]: development is when you do public finance in the US or in any developed
[Guest]: country the de facto understanding you have is that there is almost always a
[Guest]: trade-off between equity and efficiency that you want to do some redistribution
[Guest]: because you want to support the poor but that redistribution will almost always
[Guest]: reduce efficiency in the economy and why is that it's because to redistribute I
[Guest]: need to raise taxes on the rich and that's going to reduce incentives to
[Guest]: work I'm going to give out something for free which may reduce incentives to work
[Guest]: and then the most kind of I think important but underappreciated part is
[Guest]: that if I'm targeting something to the poor okay then by construction I need to
[Guest]: phase out that benefit as you get richer right because I'm giving it to the poor
[Guest]: so at some point as you earn more I have to phase it out correct but that phase
[Guest]: out often creates a very high marginal tax rate for the poor right so often for
[Guest]: every dollar I earn I might be losing 50 cents in benefits okay so suppose at
[Guest]: $20,000 or less you're getting free health insurance okay through Medicaid
[Guest]: and then you earn 30,000 you become ineligible let's say this benefit is
[Guest]: worth $5,000 okay so effectively when I'm going from 20,000 to 30,000 I have a
[Guest]: marginal tax rate of 50% because I'm losing a dollar of benefits every 50
[Guest]: cents of benefits every dollar I'm earning and then in a funny way that can
[Guest]: actually create a poverty trap by itself because now you've reduced the
[Guest]: incentives to work out of that you know out of that place of poverty so the
[Guest]: general thinking in a lot of public finance and public economics is that
[Guest]: there is this inevitable trade-off but because we care about equity
[Guest]: intrinsically right I mean as a society you care about some redistribution but
[Guest]: what is I think very nice in development is that we have a whole class of models
[Guest]: where you show that when people are close to subsistence poverty that there
[Guest]: is often no trade-off between equity and efficiency that a well-designed social
[Guest]: welfare program a well-designed intervention can not only improve
[Guest]: equity but also improve efficiency that you're making people more productive and
[Guest]: therefore able to pay back so for example there's a brand new paper which
[Guest]: I just released this week on the ICDS which is the integrated child
[Guest]: development services and at one level it's a very simple paper it's a very
[Guest]: simple paper because we're just looking at what is the impact of adding an extra
[Guest]: worker okay focused on preschool education and in fact some people said
[Guest]: you really need an RCT to go study this the point is not does it have an impact
[Guest]: the point is to quantify the impact and show that their public rate of return on
[Guest]: this is about 12 to 20 times the cost and therefore if you would invest in
[Guest]: this you will increase productivity enough that your future discounted tax
[Guest]: revenue increases will more than pay for the program so I think the point is in a
[Guest]: world of limited resources when everybody wants funding for everything
[Guest]: the holy grail for a policymaker or policy analyst is saying can I find a
[Guest]: class of policies that improve both equity and efficiency so that I am both
[Guest]: supporting redistributive justice but doing this in a way that is not just
[Guest]: about distributing a fixed pie but doing this in a way that expands the size of
[Guest]: the pie right there are a class of policies that do that but you need to do
[Guest]: a lot of heavy kind of lifting in terms of both thinking and empirics to kind of
[Guest]: design and implement those programs right see but again the point is that's
[Guest]: why it plays such a big role in development economics thinking about
[Guest]: health because the idea of a nutrition based poverty trap or health based
[Guest]: poverty trap are some of the oldest ideas in development economics now there
[Guest]: is a third strand in development which is very very kind of exciting which is
[Guest]: when you think about development economics in general you expect poor
[Guest]: countries to be able to grow faster than rich countries and there's basically two
[Guest]: reasons for that one is you start with a much lower capital stock okay and so the
[Guest]: returns to marginal returns to capital are higher okay so the the US Treasury
[Guest]: may be giving you 1% 2% because this is a capital rich society you don't have
[Guest]: those same high return opportunities whereas the returns to capital investment
[Guest]: are much much higher so automatically you would expect poor countries to grow
[Guest]: faster but the other big reason why you would expect poor countries to grow
[Guest]: faster is that it's much easier to adopt an existing technology than to invent
[Guest]: new technologies at the frontier okay so if you think about just this corona
[Guest]: crisis right I mean the reason we are even in this place of talking about
[Guest]: vaccinations is because you've had the entire research infrastructure of the
[Guest]: developed world right like I mean go after this kind of this virus and crack
[Guest]: this in about a year right so so in that sense for a development economist in a
[Guest]: way the advantage of being away from the frontier is that you just have to focus
[Guest]: on adoption but then the big question is why are there so many kind of free
[Guest]: lunches left on the sidewalk why do people not adopt existing technologies
[Guest]: so if you look at health you know you can talk about how do I manage a
[Guest]: healthcare system but the lowest hanging fruit is why are people not taking the
[Guest]: vaccinations why are people not taking their ORS these things that are
[Guest]: incredibly inexpensive incredibly like you know high returns and that's kind of
[Guest]: free money that you're leaving behind and so that's kind of created a lot of
[Guest]: kind of you know growing interest in behavioral development economics and
[Guest]: behavioral economics and particularly I think health seeking behaviors has been
[Guest]: a very very active area for you know behavioral economics to come in so in
[Guest]: terms of my own journey in health there's the public finance piece there's
[Guest]: the development piece and then there's the service delivery piece right which
[Guest]: is kind of how my first research project in in this area was what I did in 2003
[Guest]: in this nationwide study of both teacher and doctor absence right means it was a
[Guest]: study on public service delivery and so I also got into health partly thinking
[Guest]: about how do you kind of design public delivery systems across both health and
[Guest]: education now so that's in terms of the pieces of the puzzle which I have direct
[Guest]: research experience in but then there's many other parts of the puzzle right
[Guest]: mean where we can talk about again in the interest of just exciting your
[Guest]: listeners about this as an area of study right of future study we can talk about
[Guest]: health in kind of the of labor economics of economics of innovation economics of
[Guest]: regulation market failures market structure you know industrial
[Guest]: organization there's help everywhere okay so I can take a quick pause here
[Guest]: and then I'll come but I do want to give you listeners maybe one or two really
[Guest]: exciting papers in each of these subfields to give you a sense of you
[Guest]: know just how much fun people are having in kind of research and how much good
[Amit Varma]: stuff that is to be done so I'll ask you for those papers and by the way the show
[Amit Varma]: notes will contain enormous amounts of masala so kindly do check out the show
[Amit Varma]: notes after the show not during it because just concentrate and you know I
[Amit Varma]: loved your line you can't eat GDP so if some listener of the show would like to
[Amit Varma]: make t-shirts out of that or whatever you know feel free to do so you know
[Guest]: maybe you can put Karthik's face on it I think the show is I think the meme from
[Guest]: last show I mean if there's one thing which maybe I would like a little bit of
[Guest]: copyright too is this line on consultants having confidence and
[Guest]: academics having confidence intervals I think enough people like that like you
[Amit Varma]: know so maybe that's a remarkable line that's a that's a classic t-shirt line
[Amit Varma]: and now you can't eat GDP is like an incredible line I'll just quickly go
[Guest]: over a coming back to popular coming back to popular culture right like you
[Guest]: know in Godfather it's like throw the gun keep the cannoli right like you know
[Amit Varma]: so it's the food wonderful yeah so I'll quickly go over a couple of the concepts
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned thinking aloud you can tell me if I'm stating it correctly or
[Amit Varma]: not first of all you know Karthik mentioned the term poverty trap and the
[Amit Varma]: classic example of a health poverty trap is let's say that you are poor because
[Amit Varma]: you're poor you are malnourished and you are stunted right and because you're
[Amit Varma]: malnourished and stunted and you're not getting enough nutrition you don't have
[Amit Varma]: the kind of cognitive development you would otherwise have you don't get have
[Amit Varma]: the kind of energy you would otherwise have to do stuff and therefore you stay
[Amit Varma]: poor because you can't work you can't get ahead and it becomes a vicious cycle
[Amit Varma]: you can't get out of now there is tremendous value to society in getting
[Amit Varma]: you out of this vicious cycle and that is because of you know my mind goes back
[Amit Varma]: to this term that the economist Julian Simon once used he wrote a book called
[Amit Varma]: the ultimate resource where he spoke to the human being as the ultimate resource
[Amit Varma]: and this again argues against this you know false Indian notion of our
[Amit Varma]: population being a problem Simon's point was our population is our
[Amit Varma]: greatest strength all the things that we ascribe to overpopulation are actually
[Amit Varma]: issues of bad governance that every individual has a potential to give more
[Amit Varma]: to the world than she takes out but for that you have to cross a minimum level
[Amit Varma]: of subsistence where you can actually do that you know if you're caught in a
[Amit Varma]: poverty trap of any kind such as this health based vicious circle where you
[Amit Varma]: just can't get out of it then you can't reach your true potential and if you
[Amit Varma]: reach your true potential it helps everybody it's like a positive
[Amit Varma]: externality so in that sense you know the trade-off between redistribution and
[Amit Varma]: growth doesn't come into the picture because this kind of redistribution
[Amit Varma]: actually aids in growth because people are reaching their potential and helping
[Amit Varma]: everybody else also as they do that because it's a positive sum game we all
[Amit Varma]: sort of grow together now we can get to the papers that you'd like to recommend
[Guest]: that's exactly right and in fact you know let me take a slight tangent so let
[Guest]: me pose a quiz to you okay so the definition of the poverty line in India
[Guest]: okay so the definition back in the day used to be do you have the income needed
[Guest]: to consume a minimum amount of calories okay so that's it it was just the
[Guest]: minimum caloric content of say 2,000 calories a day okay now so the question
[Guest]: I have for you this is the puzzle is when you have a poverty rate at
[Guest]: independence of over 50% or 60% or even now of say 20% that means by
[Guest]: definition these are people who are earning less than the minimum amount of
[Guest]: calories needed to survive right so the question is how do people survive if the
[Guest]: definition is the minimum amount of food needed to survive is then how do you
[Amit Varma]: survive below the poverty line that's a good puzzle I mean one could just argue
[Amit Varma]: that you're not surviving as a human should that you're you're being forced
[Amit Varma]: by circumstances to operate on some on a level below what a human can operate at
[Guest]: and so you're starting to get warm right because you know people will often say
[Guest]: okay maybe they're getting transfers from others and stuff like that and even
[Guest]: that doesn't fully work because the NSS measures based on consumption and not
[Guest]: income okay and it also includes home production so the food you produce but
[Guest]: the answer is broadly what you allure it to right which is the caloric minimum is
[Guest]: the caloric minimum for a person with a healthy BMI right mean but what the body
[Guest]: does when you don't have that nutritional inputs early on is you just
[Guest]: don't grow to potential right mean and so by reducing the size of the body you
[Guest]: reduce kind of the caloric needs needed to maintain it but that comes at
[Guest]: enormous long-term cost in terms of both the cognitive development as well as you
[Guest]: know other aspects of higher likelihood of physical morbidity right mean and so
[Guest]: yeah we'll talk about nutrition if we have time in a way because that's
[Guest]: slightly different from health care but you know in some ways I would say that's
[Guest]: almost one of the most important kind of health investments we need to make so
[Guest]: yeah I think you know just stepping back about health economics as a field more
[Guest]: broadly is not just in terms of papers right but just to give your listeners a
[Guest]: sense of and again building off and some of the things I talked about about you
[Guest]: know what makes health one of the most vexing areas of kind of economics and
[Guest]: policy is it goes back to the fact that your basic market accountability
[Guest]: mechanisms often break down right mean and Ken Arrow you know who's one of the
[Guest]: most brilliant economists of the of the 20th century I think has this famous
[Guest]: paper basis you know the lesser fair solution for health care is terrible
[Guest]: okay and that's essentially because you're in a situation of what's called a
[Guest]: credence code where you don't know what you need and the doctor has to both tell
[Guest]: you what you need and prescribe so there's all of these asymmetries of
[Guest]: information there is the fact that comparison shopping doesn't work when
[Guest]: you've had an accident and like you know you're looking for a hospital you don't
[Guest]: go there and bargain like you know and saying you know what the price of your
[Guest]: life-saving treatment should be and so which means your your standard market
[Guest]: metaphors you know break down okay so and then pricing okay so pricing in any
[Guest]: market is as we know it can sit anywhere between cost and value right so there's
[Guest]: this huge wedge but if you are in a moment of very inelastic demand right
[Guest]: mean the ability to charge essentially your last living penny right mean is
[Guest]: very very high right so there are a whole bunch of reasons for why unbridled
[Guest]: market kind of you know conditions don't work which again makes this a very very
[Guest]: very active area of thinking about what would be the right kind of policy
[Guest]: frameworks to allow you to mitigate some of this because there are problems with
[Guest]: everything that's I think the really hard part about health right so which is
[Guest]: why I wouldn't even pretend to say we have solutions so in fact I'm reminded
[Guest]: of my first PhD lecture I attended in macroeconomics right so this is by Greg
[Guest]: Mankiw who I think you know who later went on to be CEA to the president and
[Guest]: he started his lecture by saying you know macro is a difficult subject he
[Guest]: say you are confused and I am confused okay the only difference is you are
[Guest]: naively confused and I'm profoundly confused so so so my goal perhaps at the
[Guest]: end of just the discussion and health is to make people profoundly confused okay
[Guest]: so that you're at least asking the right questions but coming back to you know
[Guest]: other areas of what makes health economics both so interesting and so
[Guest]: vexing is let's think about the economics of innovation all right like
[Guest]: you know so and you're seeing this battle play out right now which is how
[Guest]: much what kind of patenting regime should you have right to both servers
[Guest]: and incentive for the people who are innovating but then conditional or
[Guest]: having the innovation it is massive deadweight loss to then charge these
[Guest]: high prices because the marginal cost is obviously very very low right means so
[Guest]: how do you kind of both set up structures to get the innovation and
[Guest]: conditional on the innovation make that access you know to everybody right and I
[Guest]: can give you an example of specific solutions right mean that that are
[Guest]: worth thinking about then you can think about the economics of regulation so I
[Guest]: have a student today like you know we'll be presenting in our lunch workshop in
[Guest]: about four hours on asking about is the FDA too conservative in its regulatory
[Guest]: protocols because there's this trade-off of type 1 and type 2 error right mean
[Guest]: and so because bureaucrats tend to be risk averse that one adverse event is
[Guest]: much more costly than the potential cost of not allowing a positive drug to enter
[Guest]: the market because people don't see that so you know he's got some very nice
[Guest]: evidence now in the context of a certain class of therapeutics to then show that
[Guest]: it looks like they may be getting too conservative and then he's got another
[Guest]: paper looking at you know regulation versus litigation as a way of enforcing
[Guest]: good behavior so again you know these are just huge areas of research in fact
[Guest]: coming to economics of innovation there's a very nice paper and this is
[Guest]: these are tangents but I think it's it's fun to think about so one of the big
[Guest]: misallocation of public expenditure in my view okay say in the US is that how
[Guest]: much more money we spend on end-of-life care in the last year of life okay
[Guest]: compared to how little we spend on say early childhood care right when you have
[Guest]: an entire life of 80 years to get the returns to that investment okay now for
[Guest]: the longest time I used to think that there's a very simple political economy
[Guest]: explanation for this right which is that children don't vote okay whereas your
[Guest]: retirees are incredibly like a reliable voting block and so the American
[Guest]: Association of Retired Persons is an incredibly powerful political lobby and
[Guest]: so you know by construction you've created political incentives right mean
[Guest]: to spend much more in the ending phase of life like you know than than for
[Guest]: young children though as a society you would benefit much much more from those
[Guest]: early life investments okay but it turns out that there's this very very nice
[Guest]: paper that is asking this question about why do we have so much more medical
[Guest]: innovation in end-of-life care okay than medical innovations that say at the life
[Guest]: of 20 or 30 that if you got this new medication or new drug would
[Guest]: dramatically improve your life for 60 years okay but we still get much more
[Guest]: innovation on end-of-life drugs so why do you think this might be happening
[Amit Varma]: because the the end-of-life people would be a more powerful lobby okay so that
[Guest]: was my initial initial hypothesis and that is certainly part of the story but
[Guest]: it turns out that there's a much more basic scientific explanation that has
[Guest]: nothing to do with the incentives in terms of the political incentives of
[Amit Varma]: lobbying so so let's think more well there is also the seen in the unseen in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that if you create say drugs at 20 which make me you know live 10
[Amit Varma]: years more at the end of my life the effects are unseen whereas if you create
[Amit Varma]: something which will make someone who's 79 go to 80 the effects are more seen
[Guest]: so yeah so you're starting to get very very warm okay and so again this I'm
[Guest]: very impressed because I didn't give you any hint that I was going to talk about
[Guest]: this or this paper okay but but yes so the basic point is this right that if
[Guest]: you look at any clinical trial clinical trials have to designate what they call
[Guest]: an endpoint and saying what is the outcome we are looking at right so for
[Guest]: some of so one of the reasons these different vaccine trials are not
[Guest]: strictly comparable is that the designated endpoint was different right
[Guest]: so for some of them that the outcome they were looking at was symptomatic
[Guest]: cases others they were looking at hospitalizations but if you think about a
[Guest]: pharmaceutical company that's coming up with a new drug right the holy grail of
[Guest]: efficacy of your drug is if you can show impact on mortality okay if you can show
[Guest]: that this had an impact on reducing increasing life expectancy by even three
[Guest]: months you're golden because the value of a statistical life is kind of several
[Guest]: hundreds of thousands of dollars and if you show that I extend this by three
[Guest]: years three months then you have the ability to price accordingly okay but
[Guest]: here's the point if I have an intervention at age 20 that's going to
[Guest]: increase your life expectancy I have to wait 60 years like you know for the
[Guest]: study to be completed because essentially people you know you're not
[Guest]: dying at the same rate okay but like if you have a universe of 85 year olds in
[Guest]: your study you will reach your endpoint in your study within five years so
[Guest]: ironically one of the reasons the vaccine trials got done much faster with
[Guest]: Pfizer Moderna was because the case rates were exploding so which meant that
[Guest]: the endpoint was being reached faster in the control group relative to the
[Guest]: treatment so it's an example of how subtle and this is a lovely paper by
[Guest]: Eric Budish at Chicago and Heidi Williams who used to be at MIT and is
[Guest]: now at Stanford so you know and it's kind of discusses these time horizon
[Guest]: aspects of what determines incentives for innovation but the reason I'm
[Guest]: mentioning this is that as you've said in previous podcasts one of the great
[Guest]: miracles despite the pains of this pandemic has been how science has kind
[Guest]: of stepped up to the field but the point is what are the institutional incentive
[Guest]: structures for science right mean what determines research what determines what
[Guest]: gets research what determines what gets funded so all of those are also
[Guest]: questions where economists can come in like I mean and think about the
[Guest]: incentives because essentially economists the two core concepts I would
[Guest]: say there's three core concepts right one is scarce resources like I mean and
[Guest]: how do you kind of optimize and maximize value for money second is incentives
[Guest]: incentives incentives right anytime you something doesn't make sense you unpeel
[Guest]: the onion and seeing okay why are these incentives of the individual agents not
[Guest]: aligned with the macro good and then the third is you know empirics and data and
[Guest]: causal analysis and causal inference which is in the problem particularly in
[Guest]: things like health is theoretically I can argue any issue both left and right
[Guest]: okay so and which is why I think the empirical turn of economics in the past
[Guest]: 20 years or 30 years has been such a good thing because we're now able to
[Guest]: take a lot more of this abstract theorizing and come down to brass tacks
[Guest]: and saying okay now let's look at the actual data and seeing which side do
[Guest]: these trade-offs go off okay so and that's kind of why economics in any
[Guest]: policy area right I mean in fact Marty Feldstein you know in my last few years
[Guest]: before he retired like was trying to create a whole new field of the
[Guest]: economics of national security okay so an even bigger black box of public
[Guest]: funding is what we spend on defense okay so one very very very simple metric of
[Guest]: how little accountability there is or efficiency there is in defense spending
[Guest]: is if you look at the budget share of the Army Navy and Air Force in the US
[Guest]: okay this is basically for the most part been unchanged since World War two okay
[Guest]: and it is impossible to believe that the marginal product of your offensive
[Guest]: capacity has stayed the same across these kind of land air in me but no the
[Guest]: budgets will go lockstep because it has to be proportional to keep the
[Guest]: balance between the powers and the forces right so in education and health
[Guest]: we've economists have started you know doing a lot more in terms of analyzing
[Guest]: and understanding the outcomes for something like defense is obviously much
[Guest]: much harder but I would conjecture that there is such an incredible amount of
[Guest]: waste and inefficiency like I mean in how we spend inside the black box of
[Guest]: kind of defense ministries and that it is ripe for kind of you know more value
[Guest]: for money type analysis but this is just a way of saying why economics is and
[Guest]: should be everywhere now of course you know sometimes the field gets a little
[Guest]: bit of a bad rep because it is it can be imperialistic it can be a little
[Guest]: hubristic but I think these three core principles of economics applied to
[Guest]: almost any area of policy which is resources are scarce and so there's
[Guest]: opportunity costs and how do you maximize value for money second is
[Guest]: incentives matter and third you know let's look at the data look at the
[Guest]: empirics look at causal inference and then try to you know optimize given all
[Amit Varma]: of these constraints we have fantastic and this is also why economics is so
[Amit Varma]: fascinating that it's a lens through which you can look at all of life and
[Amit Varma]: every little bit of the world and it's incredible now you've said so many
[Amit Varma]: things and I have so many asides to make which I have been noting down that I
[Amit Varma]: will quickly go through the asides and now we will go back to that prehistoric
[Amit Varma]: time almost 20 minutes ago when you were talking about nutrition and my aside
[Amit Varma]: there about how the body adapts to the nutrition is getting is that I remember
[Amit Varma]: I made an observation in the 1990s which when I first made it I thought wait a
[Amit Varma]: minute it's just today it can't be right and then I saw it again and then I was
[Amit Varma]: like oh shit and and the observation was when I came to Bombay in the 90s mid
[Amit Varma]: 90s I used to commute by local train and in local trains I noticed that the
[Amit Varma]: people in first class were taller than the people in second class always
[Amit Varma]: without exception the first day I noticed that like whatever and then you
[Amit Varma]: notice it again and then you notice it again and and the difference at that
[Amit Varma]: time was actually stark and it's almost like the visibility of luck you know
[Amit Varma]: because it's basically your luck yeah wherever people have ended up and and
[Amit Varma]: it's it's almost as if it's it's visible you can see it you don't need to
[Amit Varma]: theorize about it the other aspect which you pointed out and you know you you
[Amit Varma]: cited arrow saying you know laser fair doesn't work in healthcare for all those
[Amit Varma]: excellent reasons you gave a symmetry of information and all of that and at the
[Amit Varma]: same time you know it is such a vexed subject that in one of your papers you
[Amit Varma]: actually demonstrate why it doesn't apply to India so we're going to talk
[Amit Varma]: more about that as we go along then you spoke about your student who's giving a
[Amit Varma]: presentation on the FDA and I'm quickly going to make a book recommendation for
[Amit Varma]: my readers which is a book called fortress and frontier in American
[Amit Varma]: healthcare by a dude called Robert Grebois who in fact won the Basia prize
[Amit Varma]: in 2014 the year before I got it for the second time an excellent book which kind
[Amit Varma]: of conceptually you know if you read the book and the concepts of the fortress in
[Amit Varma]: the frontier is one way to think about it were sort of quite eye-opening for me
[Amit Varma]: and I would agree with whatever your student is about to say in his
[Amit Varma]: presentation in the sense that I think the FDA is way too conservative and the
[Amit Varma]: lives that could have been saved had they not been conservative or what is
[Amit Varma]: the unseen but that is a subject for another episode and and and then you
[Amit Varma]: spoke about you know the whole patent and intellectual property debate and we
[Amit Varma]: won't get into that but what I will put in the show notes and recommend at my
[Amit Varma]: readers checkout is Alex Tabarrok who's a frequent guest on the show wrote a
[Amit Varma]: post recently about why patents are not a constraint in this current situation
[Amit Varma]: and I absolutely agree they are not a constraint it's just in Alex's words you
[Amit Varma]: know virtue signaling for a certain sort of people they don't solve a problem but
[Amit Varma]: at the same time what I'd like to also point my readers to is something called
[Amit Varma]: the Tabarrok curve which is about eight years ago Alex showed this beautiful
[Amit Varma]: curve which demonstrated his point of that even though patents are necessary
[Amit Varma]: if you make them too strong too stringent they actually affect innovation
[Amit Varma]: and innovation goes down and Alex's point is that they are too stringent and
[Amit Varma]: they are a problem and he demonstrates this with a beautiful graph and and this
[Amit Varma]: is where I love the elegance of economics and math and all of that so
[Amit Varma]: I'll put up all of those links let's go back now and talk about at the level of
[Amit Varma]: concept I'm gonna ask you to get a little meta here and and and here I'm
[Amit Varma]: sure at some level it mirrors your intellectual journey of understanding
[Amit Varma]: healthcare as well and my broad question is this that how should we think of
[Amit Varma]: healthcare like in the sense if you imagine India when it becomes
[Amit Varma]: independent and in you know in one of the papers you gave there was a
[Amit Varma]: startling figure that our life expectancy in 1961 was something like
[Amit Varma]: 41 years old you know which means we'd both be dead by now so we've clearly
[Amit Varma]: come a long way now in that poverty-stricken state that we were in
[Amit Varma]: then at that design stage you know how should we think about healthcare how did
[Amit Varma]: we think about healthcare you know what did we get wrong and who got it right
[Amit Varma]: what is a model to follow because everybody's poor there's no market as
[Amit Varma]: such and yet so it's in a sense it's the state's responsibility everybody
[Amit Varma]: benefits how should one think about healthcare and in your own journey what
[Amit Varma]: were the priors you started with that this is how healthcare should be
[Amit Varma]: organized and how did those priors changed over time as you got deeper and
[Guest]: deeper into the field the good news is you know like Sherlock Holmes famously
[Guest]: said right it's a capital mistake to theorize without data right you know so
[Guest]: I don't even think I came in with very strong priors right mean I started my
[Guest]: journey in this field just by wanting to figure out what's going on right means
[Guest]: are going back to that dirty shoes kind of analogy right just like I was doing
[Guest]: the work in hell in education I was also visiting PhC's around the country like
[Guest]: you know as part of that original fieldwork we did for that absence study
[Guest]: and just kind of seeing the state of the land so I've had less priors in this so
[Guest]: there's two separate questions okay one is let me talk a little bit about my
[Guest]: journey in healthcare research in India and the things that I know from my own
[Guest]: work as well as you know people like Jishnu in particular and Jeff Hammer
[Guest]: have done a lot more work in fact in this area so I'll draw a fair bit on
[Guest]: their work and of course a lot of others too but these are kind of you know the
[Guest]: economists who I feel are thinking about these systemic incentives design
[Guest]: challenges in the right way so taking a step back to the origins of the Indian
[Guest]: healthcare system so there was this committee called the Bhoray committee
[Guest]: okay so the Bhoray committee was set up in 1943 and this was a Maharashtrian
[Guest]: gentleman who was in the ICS and you know I think had held multiple senior
[Guest]: positions and the Bhoray committee took about two years to submit its report on
[Guest]: the structure of healthcare 1946 is when they submitted the report and you know a
[Guest]: lot of this follows what would one I would call is a broad WHO template for
[Guest]: the building of health systems in developing countries and the general
[Guest]: sense is that the market doesn't work for a variety of reasons and you know
[Guest]: market doesn't work not just in terms of the asymmetric information but also
[Guest]: simply in terms of locating providers in remote areas or rural areas right mean
[Guest]: that you just people don't want to be in those places and so unless the
[Guest]: government comes actively and builds out a network of clinics and staffs them
[Guest]: with public doctors and nurses there is no way you're going to get health care
[Guest]: into you know remote areas okay and this kind of structure follows a very well
[Guest]: established template of saying that you will have you know a sub center so
[Guest]: there's the district hospitals community health centers primary health centers
[Guest]: sub centers okay so you're supposed to have a sub center for about 5,000
[Guest]: population a primary health center for about 25,000 so sub centers supposed to
[Guest]: be staffed with a nurse you know one and one male multi-purpose worker and they
[Guest]: are supposed to be like the first line of primary care in in a village the
[Guest]: primary health center serves about 20 to 30,000 and is supposed to have at
[Guest]: least one fully qualified doctor I mean one MBBS doctor and you know has
[Guest]: oversight over these sub centers and then you're supposed to have the
[Guest]: community health center that caters to about 100 to 120,000 with a larger number
[Guest]: of beds you know more specialty doctors and then you've got the district
[Guest]: hospital that's supposed to be like your primary point of care in the district
[Guest]: okay so so on paper this is a perfectly sensible structure right I don't think
[Guest]: it was different from kind of the structures envisaged for many countries
[Guest]: right but the larger problem over time has been one that and I don't think this
[Guest]: is unique to health right I think the fundamental problem for India and this
[Guest]: is again something I discuss in the book in some detail because again historical
[Guest]: political economy is a massive field in fact there's a new handbook coming out
[Guest]: of like 52 chapters okay so I'm trying to synthesize that entire literature in
[Guest]: like half a chapter one section of one chapter right but but I think if you one
[Guest]: important piece of perspective to have is that when you say that people are
[Guest]: poor therefore the government has to do it that's not obvious because when the
[Guest]: people are poor the government is also poor okay so because the government is
[Guest]: nothing but the sum of the people right I mean and what is your tax base okay so
[Guest]: when people are poor in fact the government has less ability so coming
[Guest]: back to state capacity and that's because the tax to GDP ratio usually
[Guest]: increases as you get richer okay and that's because you it's a as people are
[Guest]: super poor like you can't even morally tax them okay like I mean because you
[Guest]: need the basics you have just to survive and institutionally it's much much
[Guest]: harder to tax informal workers and so you know the formalization of the
[Guest]: workforce is then very strongly correlated with the rising of a tax GDP
[Guest]: ratio okay so so I think the first slight nuance in what he said is when
[Guest]: the people are poor doesn't automatically mean the government can do
[Guest]: something because the government is also poor and in fact relatively the
[Guest]: government is more poor when the people are poor you see because the tax to GDP
[Guest]: ratio is lower in a poorer country okay so that's I think a first very important
[Guest]: point like you know for listeners to understand because you know it is just
[Guest]: so natural you go out to rural India you just see kind of how you know abysmal
[Guest]: the conditions of say health facilities are and it's just very very normal and
[Guest]: natural to come back and say oh the government should do this okay and and I
[Guest]: think the single most important problem what we don't if you want to make sense
[Guest]: of why the Indian state seems to flounder at everything the simple answer
[Guest]: is we're trying to do too much okay and and the and if you go look at the long
[Guest]: arc of the state over a 500 year period right I mean so I characterize the
[Guest]: evolution of the state into what three broad phases okay there is what I call
[Guest]: the security state right which is the primary goal of initial states was
[Guest]: national security right mean save your borders and do law and order and because
[Guest]: the biggest existential threat was you were going to be run over and enslaved
[Guest]: and slaughtered okay so and one simple way of seeing this is that in ancient
[Guest]: states even medieval Europe you were spending somewhere from 70 to 80 percent
[Guest]: of the public budget on defense 70 to 80 percent okay like you know of money was
[Guest]: essentially going on defense right so then it's in the 18th and 19th century
[Guest]: that you kind of get the second phase of the state of what I call the industrial
[Guest]: state of the developmental state where for the first time now the state
[Guest]: realizes that hey let me take tax revenue and build public goods and build
[Guest]: public infrastructure whether it's roads or railways or ports or public sewage
[Guest]: systems and that these are things that will dramatically increase productivity
[Guest]: and so the return on investment in these public investments is way way way higher
[Guest]: okay than simply going and fighting wars I still need a military so that I'm not
[Guest]: taken over but my ROI in terms of growing my productive capacity is now
[Guest]: going to be higher than going and taking over somebody else okay and and and it's
[Guest]: not like the older states didn't build roads right but the Industrial Revolution
[Guest]: dramatically increases the complementarity with the physical
[Guest]: infrastructure because now you have at scale production and so then the
[Guest]: investments in the logistics and the transport and the storage and all of
[Guest]: that starts paying off like you know once the scale of production starts
[Guest]: going up okay so and it is that period of the industrial state and massive
[Guest]: investments and public goods that is associated then with the escape from the
[Guest]: Malthusian trap right where for the first time you start seeing this massive
[Guest]: increase in GDP per capita because till then the 3,000 year history of humanity
[Guest]: is essentially GDP per capita stayed mostly flat right so because the
[Guest]: productivity went up but population also went up so coming back to your old point
[Guest]: about our human beings are you brains or are you stomachs right I mean I think is
[Guest]: how you had you know classified it at the Malthusian view is that humans are
[Guest]: stomachs and therefore like you know there is this trap and you need to
[Guest]: reduce population whereas the Romer view which is what he won his Nobel Prize for
[Guest]: and it's also in Kramer's famous 93 Oring paper right and can mean is that
[Guest]: people are brains and if the innovation is a function of the right tail of your
[Guest]: distribution then having more people automatically means you'll be more
[Guest]: innovative but that requires a certain minimum kind of capacity of the brain
[Guest]: and so it is related because the demographic transition where you move
[Guest]: from high fertility high mortality to low fertility low mortality is very very
[Guest]: important in giving parents the resources to invest in the human capital
[Guest]: of the children right so in that sense it's a bit more subtle right that you
[Guest]: can't just say I will expand the population and get the innovation if
[Guest]: that expansion is coming at the cost of being able to invest in the human
[Guest]: capital right so but anyway but coming back to the state itself so you get this
[Guest]: massive increase in GDP per capita both because you're increasing the numerator
[Guest]: from the Industrial Revolution and because reducing the denominator like
[Guest]: you know through the demographic transition and investing in the human
[Guest]: capital right I mean and so that's why that all those three pieces go together
[Guest]: right in terms of because GDP per capita is about making people more productive
[Guest]: and people get more productive and they have more human capital right so that is
[Guest]: this big transition that happens in kind of the 19th century mainly in the
[Guest]: Western states right I mean but I think the important point we need to
[Guest]: understand is that the modern welfare state right I mean has only been in
[Guest]: existence for less than 100 years okay so if you look at the data on kind of
[Guest]: the fraction of GDP that is spent on welfare programs okay so whether it's
[Guest]: food assistance, healthcare, unemployment insurance, old age insurance all of these
[Guest]: major welfare programs have only showed up in the world in the last 70-80 years
[Guest]: right after the Great Depression and particularly after World War 2 okay so
[Guest]: which means that again I think informally Arvind Subramanian and I have
[Guest]: talked about this others have talked about this but we are just putting a lot
[Guest]: of data in the book and documenting this in a comparative way and then showing
[Guest]: that listen a bulk of this explosion the welfare state that we kind of now expect
[Guest]: that a state should do really happens only after today's Western countries
[Guest]: reach a middle-income status right I mean so a simple example of say food
[Guest]: security is that the US launches food stamps at a GDP per capita of $8,000
[Guest]: PPP okay like you know which is when you're trying to do food security India
[Guest]: does PDS at a GDP per capita of $800 okay at one-tenth of that GDP per capita so
[Guest]: now and so at one level this is a great moral triumph okay so and then the but
[Guest]: the other important point to realize is that these three phases of the state are
[Guest]: also very strongly correlated with the amount of democracy you have okay so the
[Guest]: security state is essentially associated even today with non-democratic regimes
[Guest]: right you know you go to Pyongyang like I mean that's your modern security state
[Guest]: or you you know you go to so in that sense that serves the interests of just
[Guest]: the pure ruling class now what is subtle and underappreciated about this phase of
[Guest]: the industrial state okay is that it is not just that you know people decided to
[Guest]: do this it reflected a political arrangement of expanded but not
[Guest]: universal franchise right being so the extent of the vote in that period is you
[Guest]: know you're still restricting the vote to the property delete to the educated
[Guest]: elite right mean so yes it's more than kings and nobles so maybe 20-25% have
[Guest]: the vote but no women no minorities right and so what that means is that so
[Guest]: over time infrastructure investments are going to benefit everyone right it
[Guest]: benefits the poor through integrating markets and reducing prices okay but in
[Guest]: the short term the returns to those infrastructure investments are mainly
[Guest]: going to be capitalized by the property owners in the first place right I mean
[Guest]: because the property price so which means that that is the class that then
[Guest]: has an incentive to invest in those public goods okay and it is not a
[Guest]: coincidence that the welfare state is strongly correlated with expansion of
[Guest]: the franchise right so when you start getting to universal adult democracy you
[Guest]: automatically then create the political pressures for welfare okay now this is a
[Guest]: wonderful thing okay so we have study after study after study that just show
[Guest]: listen because in a way it's easy to look at this industrial state and saying
[Guest]: like I see they managed to do all of this because of limited democracy but
[Guest]: that's coming at a huge moral cost right it's coming at the moral cost of being
[Guest]: built in the backs of either slavery domestically the US or a colonial empire
[Guest]: in the case of the British right mean so and which is why the democracy before
[Guest]: development which is what makes India so uniquely different is a great moral
[Guest]: triumph okay and at no point of this discourse should it be suggested that
[Guest]: that was in any way responsible for weaknesses but like I said the moral
[Guest]: triumph of democracy then increases our aspirations of the claims we make on the
[Guest]: state but we are trying to satisfy those claims at a GDP per capita that's 10
[Guest]: times or 20 times lower than what today's West had when they try to do
[Guest]: their welfare states right so essentially this is a long-winded way of
[Guest]: coming back to your starting point of saying that how should we think about
[Guest]: healthcare in a world like you know when people are poor it is that much as you
[Guest]: may want to do healthcare right like you know you often simply don't have the
[Guest]: money right I mean because you're starting at such a low base and so what
[Guest]: it does is it raises enormously the premium on cost-effectiveness so it's
[Guest]: not that the state should not be doing things the state needs to do things
[Guest]: right but the premium on cost-effectiveness and hard-headed
[Guest]: attention to evidence is even higher when you're trying to do this right mean
[Guest]: of such a low base okay so that is more as a matter of kind of framing the
[Guest]: context but I haven't really started answering your question in terms of how
[Guest]: should you design health care in that setting but like I said like you know
[Guest]: it's just good to frame that historical context before we start getting into
[Guest]: what we should do and that's relevant even today right because yes our tax to
[Guest]: GDP ratio is now at about 18% but that's still half of what the OECD is so you
[Guest]: know every sector specific activist education Wallace won 6% of GDP health
[Guest]: Wallace won 3% of GDP everybody says like you know like we just need more
[Guest]: money but boss you're not allowed to ask me for more money till you tell me what
[Guest]: you're cutting okay like you know so which is why a big part of the book is
[Guest]: to say that given how much inefficiency we have in public spending today rather
[Guest]: than spending arguing about increasing the size of the budget and fighting
[Guest]: battles with other ministries if every minister and secretary would turn their
[Guest]: attention inwards to say how do I improve the effectiveness of my existing
[Guest]: budget we will be way way better off as a country right like I mean than
[Guest]: fighting the political fights of who gets to control bigger budgets so before
[Amit Varma]: you get to answering my question and I loved your side a long aside a couple of
[Amit Varma]: asides taking off from the aside which is that you know first of all for
[Amit Varma]: someone who is so much into empirics and data it is obviously the Sennian
[Amit Varma]: influence that you mentioned the word moral triumph and morally wrong and you
[Amit Varma]: know you're using these phrases while sort of chatting about all the things
[Amit Varma]: you chatted about so I'll go to a couple of them first of all you spoke about how
[Amit Varma]: democracy is a moral triumph and I agree but except that I'm not sure the
[Amit Varma]: democracy in India is actually a democracy in his fullest sense like one
[Amit Varma]: of the things that we really did was that we took over the colonial state
[Amit Varma]: apparatus you know this the oppressive state remains the oppressive state you
[Amit Varma]: know the tax on salt is more than what the British were charging when Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: went on the Dandi salt March so where is like the modern-day Gandhi and that
[Amit Varma]: leads me to your other use of you know the word moral when you said that it is
[Amit Varma]: morally wrong to tax the poorest which of course it is but of course we do tax
[Amit Varma]: them in terms of indirect taxes you know even the beggar at the traffic signal
[Amit Varma]: will buy salt somewhere will buy soap will buy all of those things those are
[Amit Varma]: taxed you look at the price of petrol today where it has gone you know
[Amit Varma]: completely sort of bizarre it's equal to theft and there I disagree I think the
[Guest]: petrol tax actually good but I'll come back in a moment and talk about why like
[Guest]: you know but it with a few caveats and how it is used but all else being equal
[Guest]: given that you need a certain amount of revenue I still think that's a good tax
[Guest]: but I'll come back to that in a moment yeah we'll come back to that I mean I
[Amit Varma]: think because a rising price of petrol affects everything else and therefore I
[Amit Varma]: think that is slightly problematic and also what we saw with you know the Modi
[Amit Varma]: government in 2014 is that global oil oil prices crashed but our oil prices
[Amit Varma]: didn't they weren't passed on to the consumer they were you know kept by the
[Amit Varma]: predatory state and apart from that obviously I couldn't agree with you
[Amit Varma]: more I've said it repeatedly so often that it's almost become a cliche of mind
[Amit Varma]: that we have a state that you know doesn't do the things it should do like
[Amit Varma]: rule of law and like you know what we'll be discussing today but it does a lot of
[Amit Varma]: things that it should not do and and those are not just you know wastages
[Amit Varma]: like all the areas of rent-seeking and building statues and grand buildings for
[Amit Varma]: our rulers and all of that but also in in the many different ways that it comes
[Amit Varma]: in the way of society solving its own problems like you know one reason as I
[Amit Varma]: think Ajay and I discussed or Gautam and I discussed I forget who I discussed it
[Amit Varma]: with but I think everyone would agree that one reason this second wave came so
[Amit Varma]: hard is that we didn't have good enough data about how bad the first wave really
[Amit Varma]: was and one of the reasons we didn't have good enough data is a government
[Amit Varma]: monopolized testing in the early part of when COVID-19 struck and said only we
[Amit Varma]: will test and it got in the way of private sector solving his problems and
[Amit Varma]: of course as Ajay and I discussed in our you know vaccines episode you know the
[Amit Varma]: government has to do what it has to do go on a war footing and try to vaccinate
[Amit Varma]: people but also allow private people to get Pfizer, Moderna, J&J whatever from
[Amit Varma]: outside but not only does it not do the few things it should do properly it gets
[Amit Varma]: in the way of our solving our own problems but having done with my aside I
[Amit Varma]: will let you talk about the petrol aspect of it and and then we can then
[Amit Varma]: you can get to answering the question which in case you've forgotten I'll
[Amit Varma]: remind you is how should we think at a meta level of our healthcare system like
[Amit Varma]: what kind of what were the design mistakes we made and is there someone
[Guest]: who got it right in an equivalent condition. Yeah so let me save the petrol
[Guest]: tax question when I come back and talk about pollution okay like you know haha
[Guest]: and and why I think it's a good tax but the so but coming back to systems of
[Guest]: healthcare I think that I would say the cardinal mistake right I mean and this
[Guest]: is not just India the cardinal mistake is prioritizing curative over preventive
[Guest]: public health okay so if you were in a world of scarce resources if you have to
[Guest]: say I need highest ROI on my limited spending where am I going to spend that
[Guest]: money it is it is really is in water right air quality so water quality air
[Guest]: quality are you know just these are the ways through which most diseases kind of
[Guest]: pass right mean so and things like surveillance right mean and prevention
[Guest]: now there are some things we've done well vaccination is something we've done
[Guest]: well and I'll come back and talk about the micro incentives and why it works
[Guest]: well right but this problem of prioritizing curative versus preventive
[Guest]: is not unique to India right I mean it is the nature of politics it's the
[Guest]: nature of the fact that people it just responds to the fact that people
[Guest]: viscerally you know think about health only when you don't have it right means
[Guest]: so when you're healthy you don't think about it you don't do your exercise in
[Guest]: my case I don't sleep enough you know so we all have our own kind of ways in
[Guest]: which we under invest in our health in a preventive way right but the moment
[Guest]: something goes wrong is when it becomes salient okay so that I think is
[Guest]: unfortunately it is I would say a government reflecting what people's
[Guest]: revealed preference is now ideally this is where leadership matters right
[Guest]: because a good politician gives his voters what they want a good leader like
[Guest]: I mean takes his or her voters to where we should go right I mean in the public
[Guest]: interest and so and this is why public health and health policy in particular
[Guest]: requires serious scientific expertise and serious economic expertise in terms
[Guest]: of cost-effectiveness and making the public case and saying this is what we
[Guest]: need to be doing okay so I think on in terms of the structure you can't argue
[Guest]: with the core of the system that was set up I think the reason is weakened so
[Guest]: much over time frankly again is it goes back to these resource constraints right
[Guest]: mean that you're understaffed and under equipped but also the incentive
[Guest]: constraints right so part of the problem that I was documenting in the absence
[Guest]: work is that you have these clinics with about 40% absence rates of doctors and
[Guest]: nurses and again you can't even necessarily blame the doctors and I'll
[Guest]: come back to that in a second but I think where the system fails is the
[Guest]: system still primarily thinks of itself as a logistics operation and doesn't
[Guest]: think about you know the incentives and how this plays out in the last mile okay
[Guest]: so so when we come talk about policy because I think my broad hope is that
[Guest]: you know given our three-hour rough track record is to use the first hour to
[Guest]: just talk principles the second hour to talk research in India and what we've
[Guest]: learned and the last hour to talk about policy but you know when I come back to
[Guest]: policy I'll talk about both kind of investments we can and should make on in
[Guest]: terms of public health and also in terms of of the curative health system itself
[Guest]: now but let me give you an aside in a fun joke you know which you really like
[Guest]: this problem about prioritizing curative as opposed to fundamental things that
[Guest]: give you deeper returns so you see this in the US right schools of medicine are
[Guest]: much much better funded than schools of public health okay so medical school
[Guest]: professor will have like tons of endowed professorships tons of huge research
[Guest]: grants so much money that is the public health guys are always kind of you know
[Guest]: scrounging for resources because it's kind of seen as not as urgent right so
[Guest]: that problem is that even in the US so one of my apocryphal I don't know if
[Guest]: this is a legend but I've definitely heard this but I've forgotten who I
[Guest]: heard it from so I can't source this okay but this is wonderful apocryphal
[Guest]: story about the director of the National Science Foundation and the director of
[Guest]: the National Institute of Health okay so these are the two biggest funders of
[Guest]: research in the US and and they are both testifying in front of the Senate okay
[Guest]: making the case for their budget and so the NSF guy you know apparently shows up
[Guest]: with like all of these files and like tens of thousands of papers right saying
[Guest]: here is all the amazing research that's been produced here's the citation count
[Guest]: here is how much you know this research is changing XYZ and all of these sectors
[Guest]: okay and the NIH guy has like a very very thin folder he has one thin folder with just
[Guest]: hundred sheets of paper okay and this guy has about ten thousand but at the
[Guest]: end of these hearings the NIH guy walks out with a budget that's ten times the
[Guest]: size of the NSF okay like you know so with his hundred page binder so the NSF
[Guest]: guy apparently asked him, hey boss like you know how did you do this like here I
[Guest]: have all of this evidence all of this stuff and you're walking away with a ten
[Guest]: times bigger budget what is in that folder of yours so he says aha what I
[Guest]: have in these hundred sheets of paper are the personal medical histories of
[Guest]: every one of the hundred senators like you know in this room so you know the
[Guest]: point is that we are just much more viscerally connected to things that we
[Guest]: have experienced and ill health is you know the need for curative stuff is
[Guest]: something we see in the moment of having fallen sick right but the need for
[Guest]: preventive stuff that has much higher returns is the seen and the unseen right
[Guest]: means so everything almost like my book should have a subtitle seen and unseen
[Guest]: for like every chapter right like you know and I'll give you some copyright
[Guest]: royalties of the title but yeah I mean it is it underpins everything but
[Guest]: therefore I think it's easy to kind of blame the leadership but in a way it
[Guest]: reflects what the population wants right population wants tertiary care in a way
[Guest]: more than primary care so part of the point of a moment like this is for
[Guest]: scientific leadership and kind of economic policy leadership to explain
[Guest]: to the political leadership and teach them how to explain to the people right
[Guest]: I mean that this is what we need as a country and why we need to do this right
[Guest]: mean but yeah so that's that's what we need to do yeah firstly I mean the seen
[Amit Varma]: and the unseen you should you know give the credit to Frederick Bastia because
[Amit Varma]: obviously the title is taken from his famous essay that which is seen and that
[Amit Varma]: which is not seen though that appears to me to be a clumsy English translation of
[Amit Varma]: whatever the French original title was a couple of asides and one is an anecdote
[Amit Varma]: and it's almost a circular anecdote because you sent me a paper by Das and
[Amit Varma]: Hammer from which I posted an anecdote on Twitter which I'll repeat later when
[Amit Varma]: we get to kind of that section of this episode but in response to that there is
[Amit Varma]: this excellent doctor in Mumbai called Lancelot Pinto and he shared this
[Amit Varma]: anecdote you know he gets asthma patients all the time who come to him
[Amit Varma]: when they have an asthma attack and they want medicine for it and all of that and
[Amit Varma]: each time he tells him that hey I gave you an inhaler for preventive use why
[Amit Varma]: don't you use that but they don't they don't care about preventive it's almost
[Amit Varma]: like there's an illusion of eternal good health and immortality until you know
[Amit Varma]: disease strikes you or something strikes you you don't care and then you want it
[Amit Varma]: to be cured and this sort of brings one to the question of incentives again you
[Amit Varma]: know in the sense that look for a politician why should he invest in
[Amit Varma]: preventive care or public health you know when the results of that are not
[Amit Varma]: seen you know and and will be seen like way beyond whatever the election cycle
[Amit Varma]: is and one answer as to how those incentives will be different is you know
[Amit Varma]: I'm just thinking aloud because you were mentioning pollution earlier and if you
[Amit Varma]: sort of think about the history of London London is an excellent city to
[Amit Varma]: live in today in terms of livability but at the turn of the 19th century it was a
[Amit Varma]: hellhole it was way more polluted than it is today right at the turn of the
[Amit Varma]: 20th century rather way more polluted than it is today but what typically
[Amit Varma]: happens and has happened in all the great western cities is that once people
[Amit Varma]: reach a certain level of wealth and empowerment they demand better
[Amit Varma]: governance a demand better air and then the state has no option but to give it
[Amit Varma]: to them but I would imagine and I'm thinking aloud that the condition which
[Amit Varma]: you know makes that possible is that there is empowered local government
[Amit Varma]: where it can actually happen and that's not really the case in India again I
[Amit Varma]: mean I know these are all old laments and we will no doubt discuss the episode
[Amit Varma]: on federalism yeah we'll talk about it in the episode to federalism so great
[Amit Varma]: point so now is the time to kind of get into the research part of the episode
[Amit Varma]: and into the nitty-gritties but before that let's take a quick commercial break
[Amit Varma]: long before I was a podcaster I was a writer in fact chances are that many of
[Amit Varma]: you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut which was active between
[Amit Varma]: 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time I love the freedom
[Amit Varma]: the form gave me and I feel I was shaped by it in many ways I exercise my writing
[Amit Varma]: muscle every day and was forced to think about many different things because I
[Amit Varma]: wrote about many different things well that phase in my life ended for various
[Amit Varma]: reasons and now it is time to revive it only now I'm doing it through a
[Amit Varma]: newsletter I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: where I will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy I'll write
[Amit Varma]: about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else so please do
[Amit Varma]: head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe it is free once you sign
[Amit Varma]: up each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox you
[Amit Varma]: don't need to go anywhere so subscribe now for free the India Uncut newsletter
[Amit Varma]: at indiancut.substack.com thank you
[Amit Varma]: welcome back to the scene in the unseen I'm chatting with Karthik Mullidharan on
[Amit Varma]: the state of Indian health care like let's understand the problem before we
[Amit Varma]: begin thinking about solving it because right now it seems almost unsolvable but
[Amit Varma]: no but let's I mean understanding the problem is good enough and at least we'll
[Amit Varma]: have profound confusion instead of naive confusion as Greg Mankiw once told
[Amit Varma]: Karthik so Karthik let's let's get down to the nitty-gritties one of the sort of
[Amit Varma]: delightful thing and you send me a bunch of papers which I link from the show
[Amit Varma]: notes and one of the delightful things about them was that one they were full
[Amit Varma]: of data so they confirmed a lot of my intuitions and two a lot of the data
[Amit Varma]: also you know felt counterintuitive at times and you know gave me a more
[Amit Varma]: nuanced understanding just by virtue of being what they are just the figures
[Amit Varma]: themselves without any interpretation necessarily and I found it fascinating
[Amit Varma]: and in the chapter in your book in fact you know you've structured it very well
[Amit Varma]: where you begin talking about outcomes so I'll ask you about our health care
[Amit Varma]: system you've spoken about different metrics like infant mortality life
[Amit Varma]: expectancy stunting and malnutrition and so on by which we can get a sense of how
[Amit Varma]: far we have come and the point is it's a mixed picture we've come quite far but
[Amit Varma]: we should have been much further along so tell me a little bit about sort of
[Amit Varma]: what these measures are and which ones of them were sort of revelatory to you
[Guest]: or spoke a lot or surprised you one of the points I wanted to come back to is
[Guest]: remember the thing I said which is it should be on t-shirt you can't eat GDP
[Guest]: now that's not fully right because you can eat GDP right you can use the GDP to
[Guest]: buy food to buy like better medicines buy a bunch of things right so I think
[Guest]: and we'll see here that GDP really does matter okay so that systematically
[Guest]: countries and states with higher incomes will have better health outcomes right
[Guest]: the point is more to say that GDP is not an end in itself and you know it's what
[Amit Varma]: it allows you to do so with that little caveat quick aside there it's this is a
[Amit Varma]: modification on the t-shirt for fat people like me on the back the t-shirt
[Amit Varma]: should say you can't eat GDP but on the front where the poncho is it should say
[Guest]: you can eat GDP so I think you know the yeah so like I've done the book with the
[Guest]: draft of the book chapter I've sent you is that if you want to assess a health
[Guest]: system overall you want to kind of pick a few key indicators that speaks to the
[Guest]: larger status of your population health so life expectancy is usually a good
[Guest]: statement of population health overall right and infant mortality is a good
[Guest]: measure of your health system and the reason I say that is that infant
[Guest]: mortality is something that for the most part we know what to do about okay for
[Guest]: the most part like you know the biggest causes whether it's diarrhea or whether
[Guest]: it's you know diseases that you can address with vaccinations or with very
[Guest]: targeted you know institutional deliveries neonatal health so we kind of
[Guest]: know what to do and so which is why it's a good measure of your health systems
[Guest]: because you're not at the frontier of your ignorance you are well within kind
[Guest]: of your knowledge frontier and you just have to learn how to do it okay so that's
[Guest]: why infant mortality is like a good measure of your health systems but life
[Guest]: expectancy is a good measure of your population health now there is an
[Guest]: important modification to this which the WHO uses called the HALE which is the
[Guest]: health adjusted life expectancy right so you can have a long life but have a
[Guest]: lower quality of life particularly because of things like pollution where
[Guest]: you know you're just having higher morbidity even though you may kind of
[Guest]: continue to live so that's I think an important additional metric to look at
[Guest]: and then I think the other really important metric of future population
[Guest]: health is child malnutrition okay so the mortality is can I keep the children
[Guest]: alive but if you keep them alive so in a way in a perverse way actually reducing
[Guest]: child mortality can worsen child malnutrition and that's because you're
[Guest]: keeping the left tail of the distribution alive right you know that
[Guest]: may otherwise have passed away so you know so the first step is to make sure
[Guest]: children stay alive the second part is to then make sure that by age 2 or by
[Guest]: age 5 which are kind of these key develop particularly age 2 right I mean
[Guest]: these first thousand days of life as they call them the nine months in utero
[Guest]: and the first two years of life are kind of the critical developmental period
[Guest]: where you kind of want to make sure that the children are getting these right
[Guest]: inputs in terms of you know cognitive developments and brain development and
[Guest]: other overall physiological development so that would be another key metric to
[Guest]: look at okay so I think the glass half-full story as with most things in
[Guest]: India is that we've actually made remarkable progress on many of these
[Guest]: indications in the last like you know 40-50 years right so in particular you
[Guest]: know life expectancy has gone up infant mortality has gone down almost every
[Guest]: metric has has improved but the question is like you know like they say in the
[Guest]: old grading of students like you know my teacher most of the time like you know
[Guest]: if you get a hundred great for anything else it'll be can do better right like
[Guest]: you know I mean so and so you know I think the overall grade for India right
[Guest]: mean is can do better now but before we get sanguine right it's we can also get
[Guest]: much worse okay so we can also do much worse and so and sometimes I think
[Guest]: there's a little bit of a naive push to criticize everything we've done as a
[Guest]: country and that's also incorrect right you know we have done a bunch of things
[Guest]: that are correct and that we are laboring under monumental other
[Guest]: institutional weaknesses which we can talk about so overall my net net
[Guest]: assessment of India over 75 years is that of most metrics I think we have a
[Guest]: lot to be proud of we really do at the time of independence nobody predicted
[Guest]: like you know we'd stay united or kind of stay mostly democratic so there are
[Guest]: basic sign of successes that we've had as a state and even on development
[Guest]: outcomes I think we've actually not done badly okay the question is what should
[Guest]: our benchmarks be okay and now unlike say people in education who go and study
[Guest]: education systems in Finland or Singapore and that kind of really
[Guest]: irritates the hell out of me because I'm like you know you're going in studying
[Guest]: places with 20 times the per capita income but I think if you think about
[Guest]: what would be three relevant comparisons for India okay three countries I think
[Guest]: we need to benchmark ourselves against would be China Vietnam and Bangladesh
[Guest]: okay and China because it's the only other large country of similar
[Guest]: population in terms of just the sheer size of what they're trying to manage
[Guest]: Vietnam because it has similar per capita income as India but does much
[Guest]: much better on health education and other social indicators and Bangladesh
[Guest]: because they had the same initial conditions as us right mean and in many
[Guest]: ways were actually worse than India and 71 because you know the devastation of
[Guest]: the war kind of kept them at a lower place but Bangladesh has now steadily
[Guest]: improved and is now like you know far ahead of Bengal and even ahead of like
[Guest]: all in the averages like you know I mean on a bunch of human development measure
[Guest]: okay so again so these are the three benchmarks I want us to look at when we
[Guest]: are trying to make a sense of can do better so it is not like you know I'm
[Guest]: taking a student and saying up 100% Lani I'm saying like you know look at these
[Guest]: three other comparable students who are comparable in their own way and saying
[Guest]: how can you get slightly better okay then the other big part about health in
[Guest]: India that's worth reflecting on is just how much variation that is within the
[Guest]: country right mean so you know we have this paper which I'll talk about but the
[Guest]: title of that paper is to India's okay it's to India's and in the sense that
[Guest]: the the quality of health care that you have in the southern states particularly
[Guest]: Tamil Nadu Kerala right and I mean there are some other states too is essentially
[Guest]: like a couple of standard deviations about like you know what you would get
[Guest]: in the north so I'll talk a little bit more about this measurement paper later
[Guest]: but for example we find that you know even like unqualified providers and
[Guest]: nurses in Tamil Nadu and Kerala do better than like you know fully trained
[Guest]: doctors in UP and Bihar okay so that's a separate and we'll come back to that in
[Guest]: a moment but you know there's obviously a lot to learn from the within country
[Guest]: variation right mean and what did some of these states do right the the way I
[Guest]: like to think about health systems is what I've done in the book is to just
[Guest]: have a set of graphs where I put outcomes graphed against GDP per capita
[Guest]: right so because in general more income allows you to buy more health it means
[Guest]: your parents are richer the system is richer everything's richer so I expect
[Guest]: in outcomes to improve with income but the real lesson comes from looking at
[Guest]: which are the states that are positive outliers conditional on income right so
[Guest]: holding your income constant which are the states that are doing much better so
[Guest]: to give you a simple example of how that flips results around in absolute levels
[Guest]: outcomes in Bihar look worse than Haryana okay but Haryana is actually
[Guest]: much richer than Bihar and so if you kind of control for GDP and look at
[Guest]: health outcomes actually Bihar ends up doing slightly better than expected for
[Guest]: its very very low GDP and Haryana ends up doing much worse okay now but then
[Guest]: that starts getting not just into policy issues but also into social and
[Guest]: cultural issues into empowerment of women in particular so in fact
[Guest]: ironically it turns out that women in Bihar end up being much more empowered
[Guest]: partly because there are so many more migrant workers who leave the state
[Guest]: right mean and so which means that the women are running the show like you know
[Guest]: much more than they are in some of the other states because essentially the men
[Guest]: are migrating and gone out so there are some indirect positive gender spillovers
[Guest]: like you know that you see in Bihar as a result of the structure of the economy
[Guest]: but I think the larger point when we think about how do we get better as a
[Guest]: country is to say that we've done well we have a lot to be proud of and I'll
[Guest]: talk about the specific pieces of the system that have worked well but we can
[Guest]: obviously do better okay and then you know that's how I frame that whole
[Guest]: discussion so that's kind of overall health right but we can then start
[Guest]: looking at the health care system itself in terms of the structure of the health
[Guest]: care system what does it look like I mean is there stuff you I'll pause for a
[Amit Varma]: second before I start talking about that what I'll do is everything that you said
[Amit Varma]: I'll fill in some figures which I've got from papers partly written by you and
[Amit Varma]: from the chapter in your book itself because I found them very illustrative
[Amit Varma]: like one what is the glass half-full the glass half-full is that infant mortality
[Amit Varma]: in India has declined from 142.6 per thousand live births in 1970 to 28.3 in
[Amit Varma]: 2019 and you think 28.3 is good but it's still four times more kids dying here
[Amit Varma]: than in China which is 6.3 Vietnam is 15.9 even Bangladesh is you know less
[Amit Varma]: kids die 25.6 you know again you talk about how life expectancy and at birth
[Amit Varma]: was you know 41.4 in 1960 which is mind-blowing if we were like the median
[Amit Varma]: person we'd be dead if we were in 1960 and it's gone to 69.4 today but the
[Amit Varma]: point that you made about health adjusted life expectancy was that India's
[Amit Varma]: health adjusted life expectancy what are the healthy years of your life that you
[Amit Varma]: can expect that's 59.3 so there are 10 years of the 69.4 which you're losing to
[Amit Varma]: ill health and you know when you're full potential again this number is you know
[Amit Varma]: worse than China Vietnam or Bangladesh and you give various reasons for this
[Amit Varma]: similarly you talk about sort of stunting where I'll quote from your book
[Amit Varma]: quote India has reduced a fraction of stunted children under 5 from a
[Amit Varma]: shockingly high 62.7 percent in 1989 to 34.7 percent in 2017 stop quote which is
[Amit Varma]: also shockingly high and as you point out quote India's stunting rate is 4.3
[Amit Varma]: times greater than that in China you know 34.7 versus 8.1 46 percent greater
[Amit Varma]: than Vietnam even 13 percent greater than Bangladesh which are you know the
[Amit Varma]: glass half empty therefore does seem to be quite empty then you pointed you know
[Amit Varma]: figures that reflect the variation that you gave within India you point out how
[Amit Varma]: infant mortality rates in states like MP MP is 47 Odisha is 44 Assam is 44 UP is
[Amit Varma]: 43 and you have Goa which is 8 Kerala which is 10 Puducherry which is 10 you
[Amit Varma]: know Tamil Nadu is 17 Maharashtra is 19 you know the figures kind of speak for
[Amit Varma]: themselves and about those outliers also I found that fascinating how you know in
[Amit Varma]: absolute terms Bihar seems to be worse than Haryana but when you adjust for
[Amit Varma]: per capita income it's actually much better and one you gave the Bihar side
[Amit Varma]: of the reason that so many migrants are there so women are running the show you
[Amit Varma]: know I'll again give a brief aside I once wrote a feature story on Sakshi
[Amit Varma]: Malik after she won the bronze medal at the Olympics I think she won bronze
[Amit Varma]: right but one of the things I was trying to investigate during that is how the
[Amit Varma]: hell does a state which is known for his misogyny in other words Haryana and the
[Amit Varma]: way it treats his women how the hell are they getting so many female wrestlers
[Amit Varma]: and all of that and the answer actually does lie in patriarchy where in the
[Amit Varma]: 1970s there was this dude who was a wrestling coach called Chandigiram and
[Amit Varma]: Chandigiram didn't have sons and in 77 or 78 the Olympic Committee announced
[Amit Varma]: that you know that they'd have a women's category in wrestling so he made his
[Amit Varma]: daughter I think Soneka Kalikaraman this is the dungal story
[Amit Varma]: but he's the the dungal coach Mahavir Singh Phogat was Chandigiram's
[Amit Varma]: assistant yeah so Chandigiram got his daughter into it I think her name was Soneka Kalikaraman
[Amit Varma]: or whatever and then Mahavir Phogat who was his assistant got his
[Amit Varma]: daughters into it so this whole thing was these men who don't have sons who
[Amit Varma]: want to vicariously achieve something they couldn't see the Olympics as a
[Amit Varma]: this thing and therefore they push their daughters into it but that doesn't mean
[Amit Varma]: that women are empowered in the state overall and of course women's
[Amit Varma]: empowerment is actually as you have pointed out you know one of the key
[Amit Varma]: indicators of health the kind of food that they're getting and even the
[Amit Varma]: spillover effects because a mother who's not getting enough nutrition will you
[Amit Varma]: know affect her the childbirth it will affect what happens to the kid after
[Amit Varma]: that all these massive spillover effects so I've you know everything that you
[Amit Varma]: said I've kind of taken data from your chapter and sort of put it there and I
[Amit Varma]: think it was important to give this data because it just speaks for itself it is
[Amit Varma]: so powerful that yes glass half full yeah we're not dying at 41 we're dying
[Amit Varma]: at 69 that's great but look at all these other countries what have they achieved
[Amit Varma]: and one of the things in the last episode that we did on education you
[Amit Varma]: told me what really stuck you was to look at say was to compare India and
[Amit Varma]: Indonesia and say okay we were here at you know we were at a comparable level
[Amit Varma]: once upon a time and now look at them and now look at us and where did we go
[Amit Varma]: wrong and so on having added to this this small story I'll kind of let you
[Guest]: let you continue and thanks because I think you know yeah I didn't give the
[Guest]: numbers partly because I felt you know that's a part of the chapter that's a
[Guest]: little dry but you're right the numbers are very important so I'm glad you fill
[Guest]: that in like you know so then I can talk about you know the concept so coming
[Guest]: back to the research that I want to talk about right I think what most of your
[Guest]: listeners probably have very little idea of is just the landscape of health care
[Guest]: provision particularly in rural India okay so and and this is something that
[Guest]: not just your listeners but the government frankly has no idea okay and
[Guest]: that's because you know the majority of health is provided by completely
[Guest]: unqualified quacks okay now we know that they exist because in household survey
[Guest]: data we know people are going to the private guys but we have no data because
[Guest]: they are technically illegal and so that means they don't show up in any official
[Guest]: database about you know who these people are okay let me give you a little bit of
[Guest]: my journey into kind of just the three major health studies I have done like
[Guest]: you know so I can speak in a little bit more detail about my own work but also
[Guest]: draw in on some of the work by Jishnu and Jeff in particular to give your
[Guest]: listeners a little bit of a capsule of what we've learned about the functioning
[Guest]: of the health care system you know overall so like I said you know I
[Guest]: started this journey with kind of this project and looking at quality of public
[Guest]: service delivery right and this was part of a project that was done for the World
[Guest]: Bank's World Development Report in 2004 on making services work for the poor or
[Guest]: 2003 and so it had kind of a cross-country component and part of the
[Guest]: challenge was coming up with metrics of quality that were measurable in
[Guest]: identical ways across context okay so and the reason we picked up provider
[Guest]: absence is it's a very blunt measure obviously the doctor being there is
[Guest]: necessary but not sufficient right I mean he could be there and still not do
[Guest]: anything but it's a very very basic blunt measure we said okay you know like
[Guest]: Woody Allen I think famously said right that 80% of success in life is just
[Guest]: showing up right I mean so so you know we started that very very basic measure
[Guest]: and just like we did for education we also did for health clinics where
[Guest]: essentially trained enumerators made surprise visits to over close to 1500
[Guest]: clinics across the country about 18 every state and just measured okay and
[Guest]: so what we got out of that was this estimate in 2003 that about 40% of
[Guest]: doctors and roughly the same fraction of health personnel in general were absent
[Guest]: on any given day okay that's a shocking number because once you take away the
[Guest]: vacancies right I mean the fact that these were conditional in the positions
[Guest]: being filled right you've also got vacancies that you can see how abysmal
[Guest]: that is in terms of the amount of services being offered okay now one of
[Guest]: the limitations of our all India study is we could not check because the
[Guest]: doctors could potentially be working but just be on site okay and field visits
[Guest]: they could be in villages they were they're supposed to be they're supposed
[Guest]: to be doing rounds so there was a complementary study in fact done then
[Guest]: nobody had them but three Nobel laureates right so Esther Duflo, Abhijit Banerjee
[Guest]: and Angus Deaton and though they fight on RCTs they actually work together on
[Guest]: that project right I mean in Rajasthan in Udaipur and they but there because it
[Guest]: was one district they were able to do much more detailed work of actually
[Guest]: following to to the village where the doctor or nurse could have plausibly
[Guest]: been okay and they find that in only 10% of the cases could they find them in in
[Guest]: the field and and that the story was worse than just absence right the story
[Guest]: was also one of unpredictable absence so if I know that the doctors is
[Guest]: predictably absent two days a week okay then that could be absence of 40% but I
[Guest]: know he's there on Mondays Thursdays and Fridays and so as a patient I optimize
[Guest]: around that and that's completely fine the problem is that they found that you
[Guest]: could run a regression of all the observable data and you would have zero
[Guest]: predictive power of when this guy is going to be absent okay so and that
[Guest]: makes it much much more painful for the poor beneficiary who kind of has to both
[Guest]: forego a day of earnings and pay the transport to go to one of these clinics
[Guest]: right mean and then if you go there and find that the doctor may not even be
[Guest]: there you know that becomes much you know much more problematic in terms of
[Guest]: access to public health okay so those two studies I think basically focus the
[Guest]: challenge on governance right mean that the basic governance challenges we have
[Guest]: in the public system now after that I started working much more in education
[Guest]: right and it's Jishnu and Jeff Jishnu was then the World Bank of both of the
[Guest]: World Bank then Jeff went to Princeton Jishnu is now Georgetown you know so
[Guest]: they led a lot of the work on improving measurement of how do you just measure
[Guest]: health care quality and this turns out to be a really hard problem because
[Guest]: measuring requires there is a possibility of undertreatment as a possibility of
[Guest]: overtreatment there's you know what the quality of care is going to vary by
[Guest]: protocol so long story short the method that is most commonly used in the
[Guest]: literature to assess kind of doctor competence is what is called the method
[Guest]: of medical vignettes okay so and the vignettes are the form that doctor
[Guest]: qualifying exams will look like where you say you know you give the doctor a
[Guest]: hypothetical case and you say a patient is walking into your clinic and report
[Guest]: symptom XYZ okay so what do you do next so the whole point of kind of
[Guest]: good medical education is that you have a treatment protocol or a diagnosis
[Guest]: protocol right so it's what is called a checklist of essential items saying
[Guest]: somebody walks in with the following symptoms then you know here are the
[Guest]: first four things you do right you take the basic vital statistics you measure
[Guest]: temperature you take a little bit of history and you know the patterns of the
[Guest]: fever you know so you try to ask questions so the whole point of being an
[Guest]: effective medical provider is the patient walks in with some random
[Guest]: symptom and mapping that symptom into an underlying diagnosis and then treating
[Guest]: only that and not overtreating right is the core of what you want a good doctor
[Guest]: to do okay so the first step of assessing is this provider able to do
[Guest]: that is to then assess provider knowledge okay so that's what they do
[Guest]: with these vignettes and they measure doctor knowledge in a bunch of studies
[Guest]: okay and this is kind of being used in multiple settings now the problem with
[Guest]: the vignettes is that the vignette only gives you a measure of doctor knowledge
[Guest]: okay it doesn't tell you anything about doctor practice right I mean what does
[Guest]: the guy actually do like I mean when a patient walks in right so you know you
[Guest]: might know a lot but choose to not exert effort and this goes back to again
[Guest]: something Ajay said which is health care is not a public good health care is an
[Guest]: inherently private good right because I give it to you and not to others it is
[Guest]: rival because if I spend time on you I have less time for others so I can both
[Guest]: exclude and it is rival so it is not a public good at all right it is a classic
[Guest]: private good and the amount of effort you put in is costly right so effort is
[Guest]: costly and coming back the the historical anecdote which I wanted to
[Guest]: talk about which people may not realize is that the British colonial health care
[Guest]: system the medical system that was set up it was not set up to take care of the
[Guest]: population it was set up to take care of the collector and the superintendent of
[Guest]: police right like so it and it was a completely excludable good right it was
[Guest]: the doctor the medical officer in the district's job was to make sure that the
[Guest]: ruling employees were healthy right like I mean population to do it right like
[Guest]: you know that would come maybe in times of some major pandemics or something but
[Guest]: for the most part it was a private good that was allocated to the elite okay so
[Guest]: what they then was like listen knowledge is not enough because when people walk
[Guest]: into a clinic and you know you've seen those papers so what they started doing
[Guest]: was then measuring what they call participant observations okay where you
[Guest]: have people sitting in the clinic almost like you know anthropology type you're
[Guest]: sitting as and you're just coding every interaction between the doctor and the
[Guest]: patient okay so patient walks in and you just observe now for the first half day
[Guest]: one day you might get some what I call Hawthorne effects that they work a
[Guest]: little harder because somebody's watching them but after some time we now
[Guest]: have evidence to say that it just goes back to normal practice okay so that
[Guest]: gives you a measure of effort right so what they were finding and the main kind
[Guest]: of insight from bunch of these papers now of course this level of measurement
[Guest]: could only be done in smaller samples right so they had samples in Delhi that
[Guest]: you know other samples but the punchline that was coming out of all of this was
[Guest]: that the doctors a the knowledge was low but even conditional knowledge the
[Guest]: effort in the public system was incredibly weak okay so they kind of
[Guest]: came up with this terminology what they call the no-do gap right the gap between
[Guest]: kind of knowledge and practice was so large that it kind of highlights again
[Guest]: the importance of incentives because you can hire people based on competence and
[Guest]: knowledge but that doesn't kind of ensure that they will exert effort when
[Unknown]: they actually see a patient now and this is a very difficult problem right it's a
[Guest]: difficult problem and I also sympathize with the doctors in some way because in
[Guest]: a funny way you almost have negative incentives for effort right because if
[Guest]: you put in a lot of effort you get a reputation as a good doctor and you get
[Guest]: more work right and you get more patients but your compensation is not
[Guest]: going up your resources are not going up there is nothing in the system that is
[Guest]: actually variably increasing with the amount of patients you see okay so and
[Guest]: I'll come back to the separating equilibrium of how these incentives
[Guest]: work out and then they also looked at the private doctors and see that the
[Guest]: private doctors in general have less knowledge okay but they actually work
[Guest]: harder because they function closer to the frontier of their lower
[Guest]: knowledge right so if quality is knowledge times effort the public guys
[Guest]: have more knowledge because you're recruiting based on more formal
[Guest]: credentials the private guys are much less qualified on average but they work
[Guest]: harder and they function closer to the frontier of knowledge okay so that was
[Guest]: kind of the broad message that was coming out of that work okay now the
[Guest]: limitation with that is in the participant observation when I'm sitting
[Guest]: in the clinic and coding the interaction I don't know what is the underlying
[Guest]: ailment the patient is coming with okay so I can observe your bedside manner I
[Guest]: can observe how many questions you ask I can observe how many medicines you give
[Guest]: but I have no idea if what you've done is correct right because I don't know
[Guest]: what the underlying disease is that this random patient is walking in with now in
[Guest]: the vignette I know that right in the vignette I know what the underlying case
[Guest]: is and I'm structuring the whole case so that a good doctor will find his or her
[Guest]: way to the correct case and the correct diagnosis right so the problem in the
[Guest]: POPO measures effort vignette measures knowledge but I want to measure both in
[Guest]: the same case to then really get a sense of is the doctor getting the right
[Guest]: protocol of care okay and so then the big innovation and this is you know it's
[Guest]: been used in medical studies before but just for your listeners is a detour into
[Guest]: the wonderful world of research right like you know is the so the the closest
[Guest]: to a Bollywood operation like you know we've had in any of our recent studies
[Guest]: is if you truly want to understand both doctor knowledge and doctor practice the
[Guest]: only way to do this is with what are called standardized patients okay so
[Guest]: these are essentially actors like I mean who are trained to be fake patients
[Guest]: right mean who go in and present a set of symptoms now because you know the
[Guest]: underlying case okay so now you can actually assess whether the quality and
[Guest]: the protocols the doctor is doing are correct as per the medical checklist for
[Guest]: that case so you both see knowledge and you effectively see the real practice of
[Guest]: what this person is doing okay and then at the end of the transaction you kind
[Guest]: of observe the medication so you get to observe both over medication and under
[Guest]: medication and you observe the fees charged so then you can kind of analyze
[Guest]: what our market prices what are these prices reflecting okay now and again
[Guest]: this is not something we came up with right so standardized patients are a
[Guest]: well-established tool for medical education in the US and Canada so if
[Guest]: you're a medical student at some point in your life you will see a standardized
[Guest]: patient right I mean so it is part of your training and part of your testing
[Guest]: okay that a random person will walk in and like you know you're going to be
[Guest]: assessed on how you do so the only thing is we adapted that same method for
[Guest]: assessing the quality of actual care okay so this is a little bit of the
[Guest]: research journey in terms of just the methods in the measurement so I think
[Guest]: Ajay last time was talking about you know how little we know you know and one
[Guest]: of the reasons I thought is a good time to do the episode is it builds up on
[Guest]: that you know that we actually do know a lot but not much not as systematically
[Guest]: as we would like to because these were these one-off studies and we need to do
[Guest]: a lot more of them so you know and then there was this last kind of study so the
[Guest]: two studies which I did then after so Jishnu and Jeff did a bunch of these
[Guest]: things and then we got together in about 2010 and worked together on two major
[Guest]: studies so one was an all India study looking at the availability and
[Guest]: landscape of providers in rural India so it was a representative sample of
[Guest]: villages and all we did was we just went and did a census of providers okay like
[Guest]: you know so who is here right like you know and where are people going to and
[Guest]: then on an all India basis there was no way you could do standardized patients
[Guest]: and so there we measured quality just using the vignettes okay so that was a
[Guest]: measure of doctor knowledge but then in one study in Madhya Pradesh in a second
[Guest]: study in MP we went did a much much deeper dive right I mean where we had
[Guest]: these standardized patients then go and present to both public and private
[Guest]: clinics to go present to the same doctor in his public and private practice okay
[Guest]: and we'll come back and tell you a bunch of stories about that but you know from
[Guest]: a research perspective those were some of the studies that were done and yeah
[Guest]: I'll take a little pause and come and give you the insight so maybe I'll give
[Guest]: you the insights you know I'll I'll start with the all India one maybe right
[Guest]: and then take a pause and come in with the MP one after that unless you want to
[Amit Varma]: come in right now no I think I'll come in right now because there is so much
[Amit Varma]: that you mentioned to unpack I think let's kind of unpack them one by one and
[Amit Varma]: come to this and I'll get to the rural part of it and absenteeism and all of
[Amit Varma]: that later but very quickly to just sort of elaborate on what you said about a
[Amit Varma]: vignette for the sake of my listeners what that in real terms would be that
[Amit Varma]: say I go to what I go to the doctor and I'm the sort of actor as it were acting
[Amit Varma]: as if I have something and I will say I have diarrhea and then what we are
[Amit Varma]: measuring is what are the questions that person asked me how relevant are they to
[Amit Varma]: my problem so you know these are the five questions that a good doctor would
[Amit Varma]: ask these are the six things that a good doctor would check in the last of them
[Amit Varma]: apparently being some indentation in the temple or the head or something which
[Amit Varma]: has something to do with diarrhea and so on and and you grade them based on how
[Amit Varma]: many of these they actually ask which I kind of found fascinating now there's
[Amit Varma]: this extremely interesting conversation you know in the 2007 study Jishnu Das
[Amit Varma]: and Jeffrey Hammer where you know Das had a conversation with this doctor in
[Amit Varma]: a slum and I love this conversation so I'm just gonna read it out because it is
[Amit Varma]: I think so relevant to present times also where this doctor says yes there is
[Amit Varma]: a lot of diarrhea and dysentery in this locality what can they do as well the
[Amit Varma]: water is dirty people don't know how to boil it that's why the children are
[Amit Varma]: always falling sick so Jishnu asks so what do you do for
[Amit Varma]: children with diarrhea so the doctor says what can we do the usual things we
[Amit Varma]: tell the mother to give water with salt and sugar to the baby and then also give
[Amit Varma]: some medicines so Jishnu asks such as so the doctor says the usual metrogel
[Amit Varma]: loperamide furoxone forgive me for the pronunciations young doctors I forgive
[Amit Varma]: you for your handwriting and then Jishnu says but isn't ORS enough ORS being
[Amit Varma]: oral rehydration basically salt only and the doctor says of course the who and
[Amit Varma]: the others keep saying we should only give ORS but if I tell the mother she
[Amit Varma]: should go home and only give the child water with salt and sugar she will never
[Amit Varma]: come back to me she will only go to the next doctor who will give her all the
[Amit Varma]: medicines and then she will think that he is better than me stop quote and this
[Amit Varma]: of course speaks to a classic problem that you point out about how private
[Amit Varma]: doctors often tend to over prescribe for different kinds of incentives and we'll
[Amit Varma]: discuss that in detail and and I in fact reproduced I took a screen grab of this
[Amit Varma]: and put it on Twitter today because it spoke to me because yesterday there was
[Amit Varma]: an interview with dr. Lancelot Pinto and another doctor and I link it from the
[Amit Varma]: show notes where they were talking about how one of the things that is making
[Amit Varma]: kovat worse among the many things making kovat worse one of the things that is
[Amit Varma]: making it worse is that people are just over medicating where dr. Pinto's point
[Amit Varma]: is that even we know all the things that don't work like plasma and ivermectin
[Amit Varma]: and hydroxychloroquine and even remdesivir is only in particular
[Amit Varma]: clinical situations is recommended but one of the things that does work is
[Amit Varma]: dexamethasone which is a corticosteroid but even that should only be prescribed
[Amit Varma]: at a particular stage of the illness and what doctors are doing it is that when
[Amit Varma]: young people are reporting fever they are giving steroids from then only and
[Amit Varma]: what the steroid will do is it will reliably take the fever down but it will
[Amit Varma]: also suppress the immune system reaction and then you will be hit harder with
[Amit Varma]: kovat and so people are getting over that fever and then just falling apart
[Amit Varma]: and it's because of this over medication that is happening so what is required at
[Amit Varma]: the start is that that initial fever of four or five days you just have to live
[Amit Varma]: through it that's a body's immune system unless your oxygen level levels go down
[Amit Varma]: you don't really need to do anything you know that's that that's a natural
[Amit Varma]: response of the body if you over medicate at that point you only make it
[Amit Varma]: worse and one of the things that is happening is patients are asking for all
[Amit Varma]: of these because they will read that array my uncle got ill and he was given
[Amit Varma]: these five medicines and remdesivir and plasma and all of that and doctors under
[Amit Varma]: that pressure just because it the workload is so insane anyway they'll say
[Amit Varma]: fine you know you can also have that and then these people will put out calls on
[Amit Varma]: Twitter plasma remdesivir and all of that so I thought that in these current
[Amit Varma]: times that's sort of an important aside that one should make I think the
[Amit Varma]: technical term for it is polypharmacy and and that this seems to be a tendency
[Amit Varma]: that Indians have ki kuch bhi ho gaya chalo antibiotic de do yeh de do and they
[Amit Varma]: feel a doctor is competent if that kind of happens yeah no I think you know
[Guest]: you're just speaking to what makes healthcare so so vexing right because
[Guest]: there is kind of both you know what you're describing which is patient
[Guest]: induced demand like you know for things that are suboptimal and doctor induced
[Guest]: demand you know in other cases right mean where you're kind of you know all
[Guest]: else being equal you recommend procedures where you make you know where
[Guest]: the revenue is you know is more lucrative and so that is a very very
[Guest]: difficult problem and this is why if you go back to look at the core of doctor
[Guest]: training right why is why do they spend so much time on medical ethics why did
[Guest]: they spend so much time on the Hippocratic Oath why do they spend so
[Guest]: much time on do no harm it's precisely because the founders of the modern
[Guest]: medical profession recognized just how powerful a doctor is and that the only
[Guest]: way to kind of even attempt this problem of kind of how much asymmetric
[Guest]: information and power there is is to actually build a more noble doctor right
[Guest]: mean and so you know if I can inculcate in you a certain intrinsic identity that
[Guest]: says deviating from my intrinsic identity is costly right that's the one
[Guest]: hope we have in the long term of actually building a better medical
[Guest]: system and this has to do both with doctors in terms of what they do and
[Guest]: also doctors ability to resist right mean patient demand and saying that you
[Guest]: know so and this is why customer satisfaction that we normally use okay
[Guest]: is not even a always a good measure here I think Jishnu gave me this wonderful
[Guest]: quote once I forget I think it's from Kenneth Prendergast as a paper it says
[Guest]: you know doctor's satisfaction from drug addicted client who's assessing the
[Guest]: doctor based on is he getting his next dose like you know I mean is not a good
[Guest]: measure of doctor quality right so in that sense the measure of doctor quality
[Guest]: is like I said to diagnose precisely and give you exactly what is needed and
[Guest]: nothing more and I remember an old conversation with Siddharth Mukherjee he
[Guest]: may not even remember I think I met him once in Boston he's at least five or six
[Guest]: years older than me but and I remember very distinctly he told me that is it a
[Guest]: good doctor recognizes that every medication is a poison right mean
[Guest]: because it is being given to kill something okay like a mean the body so
[Guest]: you kind of want to absolutely minimize what you do to just go after what the
[Guest]: ailment is and nothing more right now but the flip side of that is now if you
[Guest]: take that medical ideal into the practical situation of kind of the poor
[Guest]: in India is that you cannot blame them like I mean for wanting more medicines
[Guest]: because essentially if you are poor and you've fallen sick you are on the verge
[Guest]: of starvation because you don't have income right so the single most
[Guest]: important kind of thing that is driving the demand for health care for the rural
[Guest]: poor is how do I get back to work it's not like I mean they're looking for all
[Guest]: these medicines to say I want the steroids to give me a high no it is
[Guest]: essentially every day I don't work is a day closer to destitution and so there's
[Guest]: no unemployment insurance there's no safety net and so which means that
[Guest]: coming back to basic economics of kind of the time discounting right mean the
[Guest]: discounting calculation you're doing is very simple it says yes if I take over
[Guest]: medication there might be some adverse side effects in the future but I need to
[Guest]: survive to the get to that future right I mean so which means that the discount
[Guest]: rate is very very high and so what may seem medically optimal right I mean is
[Guest]: often not what is optimal for the patient and one of the things we
[Guest]: document in our MP study is that there is a ton of over prescription but the
[Guest]: over prescription is not only driven by the incentives of the doctor to make
[Guest]: more money when I give you more medicines right the over prescription is
[Guest]: driven by the need for the patient to want to get symptomatic relief so that
[Guest]: he or she is able to go back to work and so then in a world where the doctor
[Guest]: actually doesn't know what's going on with you right like I mean he gives you
[Guest]: a cocktail hoping that something will have an effect right like I mean and
[Guest]: that you'll feel better so in that sense the over medication is not it's kind of
[Guest]: an ethically much more murky area right like you know because he's not just
[Guest]: doing it to make money he's doing it because he wants to help you and what
[Guest]: you want more than anything else is to get better enough to go back to work
[Guest]: right and that's what makes the ethics of this so kind of complicated and
[Guest]: fraught right so yeah so it's like I said there's only more and more profound
[Guest]: confusion right I mean that if you ask me today what should the policy response
[Guest]: to this be I frankly don't have a good answer right I mean it is it would be
[Guest]: more along the lines and I'll come back and talk more about training and
[Guest]: education and how you can kind of see in a way what you want to do is improve the
[Guest]: doctor's ability to diagnose and credibly communicate that to the patient
[Guest]: right so that the doctor can act as this trusted filter of both what you need and
[Guest]: what you don't need in a world where like you know there isn't this immediate
[Guest]: competitive pressure or the sense of saying okay I got the wine idea to
[Guest]: dr. Cheney right like I mean so yeah injection a data dr. Cheney right like
[Guest]: you know so there are these you know tropes that people have and these you
[Guest]: know these are very very very complicated issues to solve it's really
[Amit Varma]: fascinating I mean in in fact this is a classic example where real medicine
[Amit Varma]: might have a placebo effect because a patient you know feels that if they are
[Amit Varma]: given an actual you know medicine instead of just being told that go home
[Amit Varma]: and you know put some salt in your water and drink that and like come on yeah I
[Amit Varma]: mean if I'm paying good money to see a doctor how can you tell me to drink salt
[Amit Varma]: water costo though the other sort of observation that you made before I come
[Amit Varma]: to my question and I found this like so fascinating and and so telling is this
[Amit Varma]: rule of three this is from the Das and Hammer study where Das and Hammer
[Amit Varma]: write that quote the average interaction with a doctor in our sample is governed
[Amit Varma]: by the rule of three stop quote and then they write the patient arrives three
[Amit Varma]: days after becoming sick the doctor spends 3.8 minutes and asked 3.2
[Amit Varma]: questions after which the patient leaves with 2.6 different medicines 0.5 of which
[Amit Varma]: are antibiotics stop quote and such a fantastic illustration now question
[Amit Varma]: number one what does this tell us this rule of three and question number two in
[Amit Varma]: a larger sense and this goes across multiple studies which you'd shared with
[Amit Varma]: me what do we know about the difference between private and public doctors both
[Amit Varma]: in terms of their competence in terms of their effort is there a sort of a
[Amit Varma]: distinction depending on you know the locality they are in if they're in a
[Amit Varma]: rich locality or a poor locality is there a distinction between some you
[Amit Varma]: know a doctor in a hospital and a doctor with his private clinic and is there a
[Amit Varma]: distinction with with a doctor who is both by day he's you know a doctor in a
[Amit Varma]: public clinic but also has his own private practice outside now all of
[Amit Varma]: these are nuances you have explored so give us a dope yeah so I think the let
[Guest]: me just start with some basic facts right I think the that's the easiest
[Guest]: place to start right so what did we do in this kind of all India study that you
[Guest]: know just was published in social science and medicine last year and this
[Guest]: is the paper that's called the two India's right so what we did was had a
[Guest]: representative sample of villages where we just went and first counted right
[Guest]: mean who are all the providers and then did a random sample where we went and
[Guest]: administered these vignettes so I think the goal is just to characterize the
[Guest]: landscape right who are these providers how can I write I mean and so the the
[Guest]: main punch line that comes out of this is that over 70% of the overall
[Guest]: provision of health care in rural India is coming from the private sector and
[Guest]: the majority of these private providers have no formal qualifications whatsoever
[Guest]: okay so these are what you would call quacks okay but we need to kind of put a
[Guest]: lot of nuance into this term quack okay which I'll come to in a second okay
[Guest]: about who are these quote-unquote doctors okay so that's fact number one
[Guest]: okay about the the structure of the health care system is that 70% is
[Guest]: private most of them are quacks and this is not even including people with
[Guest]: legitimate qualifications who are practicing outside the area of training
[Guest]: so you have the traditional Indian medicine people who have Ayurveda and
[Guest]: Unani and homeopathy kind of degrees but are actually practicing allopathy right
[Guest]: mean and that's again reflects the fact that you know these alternative systems
[Guest]: are meant to be more about wellness rather than cure but the patient is not
[Guest]: interested in wellness patient goes for cure and so they end up kind of
[Guest]: dispensing the same allopathic medicine that gives you the symptomatic relief so
[Guest]: that is fact number one okay the the share is major mainly private and more
[Guest]: than 50% are unqualified the other important fact is that this is above 50%
[Guest]: in literally every state in India okay so except Kerala which is about 45 47%
[Guest]: even there so the private share is very very big okay so it's not the fact and
[Guest]: this is a little subtle okay it's not the fact that but Tamil Nadu and Kerala
[Guest]: that have better public systems have less private okay they also have more
[Guest]: private but their private is much better okay so and this is a very deep and
[Guest]: subtle point I want to make which is coming back to your story about when the
[Guest]: elites have exited from the private sector why do we care about improving
[Guest]: the public okay and the subtle point is that the reason I care about state
[Guest]: capacity and improving public systems is that not only does it directly benefit
[Guest]: those who use the public system it also indirectly benefits everybody uses the
[Guest]: private system because the private is forced to compete with the improving
[Guest]: public so when the public option gets better you are also automatically
[Guest]: forcing out the left tail of the distribution of the private providers
[Guest]: and forcing the private distribution up correct so there's that overall spill
[Guest]: over in the economy that is not being accounted for in terms of the value of
[Guest]: investing in strong public systems okay so the so the second key fact is that as
[Guest]: your systems get better it is not that the private goes away but the private
[Guest]: gets better okay so the so the public is pushing up the base and it's that that
[Guest]: is in fact a tide that lifts all the boats okay so that's the second key fact
[Guest]: the third is just how much variation that is across the country right mean
[Guest]: and so if you look at these vignettes and look at the quality what you'll see
[Guest]: is that nurses and sometimes even the unqualified providers in Tamil Nadu and
[Guest]: Kerala do better on these vignettes than even people notionally with MBBS
[Guest]: degrees in UP and Bihar okay like you know now and again this is not to malign
[Guest]: UP and Bihar but I suspect it speaks to the quality of medical education or the
[Guest]: fact that you can get through there are probably more kind of fake colleges I
[Guest]: don't know enough about this right mean but you know it certainly highlights I
[Guest]: would say the value of say some of these national systems like neat and next okay
[Guest]: like you know that says let's have a standardized entrance test a standardized
[Guest]: exit test so that regardless of what your kind of training program is that
[Guest]: you have to show on a certain common standard right mean that you've achieved
[Guest]: so the other key fact which I want people to understand and this is more
[Guest]: from my fieldwork rather than systematic data collection is a little bit more
[Guest]: about who these quacks are okay like you know so how have they become so
[Guest]: prevalent and why are they all over the place so two things one that the state
[Guest]: is often not there and second even if the state is there the state is not
[Guest]: accountable right so one of the striking findings we have in our MP study is that
[Guest]: the share of the private guys is above 60 or 70 percent even when you have a
[Guest]: public MBBS doctor posted in the village okay so it's not just a question of have
[Guest]: you posted a public doctor because the public doctor is often not there so
[Guest]: coming back to who these private quacks are see most of them are have done what
[Guest]: you would call an informal apprenticeship okay that they have
[Guest]: shadowed a regular doctor like you know and kind of been in this guy's clinic
[Guest]: for a year or two observed a bunch of what he does and then they say okay I'm
[Guest]: ready to go off and kind of do my own thing okay now and as with any skilling
[Guest]: program or apprenticeship program in India there is so much variation in the
[Guest]: quality of who you shadowed that that automatically then means that there are
[Guest]: some of these guys were not bad at all because they've actually informally
[Guest]: imbibed some pretty good practices and then there are others were abysmal okay
[Guest]: so that's one part about who these people are now but the second thing
[Guest]: that's important to understand about why they are not these evil kind you know
[Guest]: there's a sense that oh there these evil profiteering quacks okay but that I
[Guest]: think is far from the case because they are often highly embedded and very very
[Guest]: respected in their communities because they are the only people providing care
[Guest]: and they have to live in that community right so in fact the best incentive for
[Guest]: them not to do something wrong is if something bad happens on their watch
[Guest]: they're going to get beaten up okay like I mean and that's often a better
[Guest]: incentive so Jishnu has sent me stories about like you know people getting
[Guest]: beaten up like you know if the community feels that the doctor has done something
[Guest]: bad so in that sense that they are not formally qualified but they are embedded
[Guest]: in their communities they have kind of some experience some practice and then
[Guest]: the other source by which they learn things is the informal education and
[Guest]: again this is not in the data set but it comes from my field conversations with
[Guest]: these guys is they actually get a fair bit of continuing medical education from
[Guest]: pharmacy representatives okay because the pharmacy guys the government might
[Guest]: not know who these guys are but every pharmacy rep knows them because that's
[Guest]: where the medicines are being pulled through so the pharmacy reps will have
[Guest]: in their beat the data of all of these informal providers and they will make
[Guest]: sure they've gone and visited them and so that becomes like a source of now of
[Guest]: course it's petrifying to think about then how much influence a pharmacy rep
[Guest]: has in terms of like you know over medication because these guys then have
[Guest]: incentives to push more medicine so but it's just giving you some sense of the
[Guest]: lay of the land right I mean about who these guys are and that they that they
[Guest]: account for the lion's share of health care in the country now then coming back
[Guest]: to the research about the quality right so it is one thing to say that they
[Guest]: exist and this is what they look like on paper okay but what can I say about that
[Guest]: actual quality and that is what the MP study does right because what the MP
[Guest]: study does is it takes measurement very very seriously and this is a paper in
[Guest]: the American Economic Review and what we do is we have these standardized patients
[Guest]: and we draw a random sample of villages and we make a census of all of the
[Guest]: providers and then we randomly draw samples of public and private clinics
[Guest]: and then we send these SPs over a period of time to go present their cases right
[Guest]: so then we can observe exactly the quality of care that's happening in the
[Guest]: public and the private the qualified the unqualified and then just understand that
[Guest]: broad gamut so again this is one state it's you know about 160 villages
[Guest]: actually but it's better data than we have anywhere else so it's the best we
[Guest]: have right now but the key kind of big picture messages are the private guys
[Guest]: know less okay because they're less qualified but they systematically work
[Guest]: harder okay and now by work harder it means they're spending more time they're
[Guest]: asking more questions they're getting more of the items on the checklist okay
[Guest]: and so when you put that picture together the overall quality of care
[Guest]: that you get from these quacks is not different from what you get from the
[Guest]: public health clinic and now this is because when you go into the PHC most of
[Guest]: the time the doctor is not seeing you because the doctor is not there so even
[Guest]: in the public system you're being seen by a ward boy or a compounder or
[Guest]: somebody who is not actually formally qualified but who just happens to be
[Guest]: there like you know minding the store so in that way the private guy who's less
[Guest]: qualified like you know is not giving you any inferior care now but going back
[Guest]: to something we said in the education episode the absolute quality of care is
[Guest]: abysmal right I mean so it's just like those two bears I talked about last time
[Guest]: right you the private guy just has to be slightly better than the public guy
[Guest]: that's why improving public is so important right because it forces the
[Guest]: private guy to up his game as well so what you have today is overall the
[Guest]: public system hires more qualified people but because it doesn't have its
[Guest]: governance act together right I mean and you can't get accountability for a
[Guest]: variety of reasons that the effort is really low the private guys have lower
[Guest]: knowledge but much higher effort okay and so put together the composite result
[Guest]: of that is that the private guy is at least no worse okay slightly better but
[Guest]: at least no worse and just like education right so just like my school
[Guest]: voucher study we found exactly the same thing right that the private school
[Guest]: teachers are much less qualified but they work much harder so the net net
[Guest]: result is that the value-added is comparable but they do it at a much lower
[Guest]: cost per child and that's because the salaries of the private school teachers
[Guest]: are about one-fifth and so similarly here what you'll see is that the cost
[Guest]: per patient in the private sector is substantially lower because most of
[Guest]: these guys you know they charge visas once you add all the salary costs in
[Guest]: the public system and divide that by kind of the the utilization you get a
[Guest]: much much higher cost per patient for comparable quality so I'll stop there
[Guest]: and then come back to this other even more cool study where we then look at
[Guest]: the dual sample of the same doctor in his public and private practice but let
[Guest]: me just pause for a moment on this representative sample and get you in
[Amit Varma]: there yeah like first of all as an aside again like one of the statistics that we
[Amit Varma]: know about education is also true of healthcare I found out while reading a
[Amit Varma]: chapter in these papers which is that even though people have free public
[Amit Varma]: options available they still prefer to go by and large to private doctors and
[Amit Varma]: that in itself is telling now I'll quickly summarize in a sort of two
[Amit Varma]: separate buckets a bunch of insights that really struck me and you can tell
[Amit Varma]: me where I'm making a mistake or you'd like to add something to that and one is
[Amit Varma]: the urban bucket which is what these DAS and hammer studies look at
[Amit Varma]: specifically in Delhi and all of that where they kind of point out that look
[Amit Varma]: there is a stark difference between the private guys and the public guys but
[Amit Varma]: there are nuances within that like number one the private guys always show
[Amit Varma]: more competence and more effort but then within the private guys there are two
[Amit Varma]: categories one is the MBBS guys who are actually trained and the other is the
[Amit Varma]: untrained guys within the untrained guys there will be the Ayush guys who you
[Amit Varma]: could argue have been trained wrongly and the apprentice type people who are
[Amit Varma]: you know picking it up from a proper doctor and kind of taking that and
[Amit Varma]: everywhere you find that not only does private outperform public but in
[Amit Varma]: different localities you know private and public will both rise so the
[Amit Varma]: difference between them will be there and in poorer localities whether it is
[Amit Varma]: private or public it will be much worse than in a richer locality so the
[Amit Varma]: locality matters a hell of a lot now that is the urban India card the little
[Amit Varma]: snapshots that we got in rural India what I kind of found fascinating was how
[Amit Varma]: in your paper on two India's you've described how people travel for medical
[Amit Varma]: care where you write quote people may visit the clinic in their village but if
[Amit Varma]: they have something more serious they will go to the highway and if they have
[Amit Varma]: something really major they will take a bus and go to the city but people will
[Amit Varma]: almost never travel from one village to another stop quote you also point out
[Amit Varma]: that quote a high quality provider who is posted to a village will spend a much
[Amit Varma]: smaller portion of the day seeing patients compared to a provider in a
[Amit Varma]: district hospital stop quote and then you make a point that you also made in
[Amit Varma]: the education episode in that context that sometimes better roads are more
[Amit Varma]: useful than more rural clinics that you want to connect a patient with a
[Amit Varma]: healthcare and if you can't take Mohammed to the mountain you get the
[Amit Varma]: mountain to him you know so if you can't provide that excellent medical service
[Amit Varma]: at his village if you just provide better roads better maybe mobile
[Amit Varma]: connectivity or whatever then he can access that better care but here I have
[Amit Varma]: a question like the vast majority of the care that is kind of being accessed is
[Amit Varma]: private here and you've pointed out that you know in your study you find that
[Amit Varma]: there are 3.2 doctors per village and only 2.8 percent of them have an MBBS
[Amit Varma]: right and while there is variation between states the state of affairs is
[Amit Varma]: kind of ubiquitous so now when I connect this with how you describe the travel
[Amit Varma]: that if it's something immediate like if I have diarrhea or a cold I'll go to the
[Amit Varma]: local guy and if it's something a little more serious I'll go to the highway and
[Amit Varma]: if it's something really really serious I'll take a bus to the nearby town if
[Amit Varma]: it's possible now what this therefore would imply is that even if the so-called
[Amit Varma]: doctor is not that trained doesn't have a degree the point is that you know a
[Amit Varma]: common cold gets better on its own it's a reversion to the mean kind of thing
[Amit Varma]: many of these common things that they would go for like even diarrhea will
[Amit Varma]: kind of get better and it'll almost be folk wisdom that have you know salt in
[Amit Varma]: water and all of that by now so you know is that's what playing out there that
[Amit Varma]: they're going out to a private doctor in a situation where it's not serious to
[Amit Varma]: begin with and it doesn't really matter if the doctor is good or not I mean if
[Amit Varma]: you have 3.2 per village and only 2.8 per have MBBS they obviously can't treat
[Amit Varma]: anything serious for the serious stuff you're going elsewhere anyway so it's
[Amit Varma]: almost like placebo doctors I mean the reason a lot of quackery appears to work
[Amit Varma]: to people and I have written frequently on this in various places the reason a
[Amit Varma]: lot of quackery appears to work is two reasons one is of course a placebo
[Amit Varma]: effect which is far more powerful than we realize which is why every proper
[Amit Varma]: piece of medicine has to pass a double blind placebo test and by the way no
[Amit Varma]: homeopathic medication has ever passed something like that and the other reason
[Amit Varma]: is reversion to the mean in the sense that many diseases just happen and get
[Amit Varma]: better on its own including in the vast majority of cases even COVID where you
[Amit Varma]: will get fever for a week or you'll be asymptomatic and it will just get better
[Amit Varma]: and if at the peak of your symptoms you take some medicine you will ascribe it
[Amit Varma]: to that correlation and causation and you will imagine that's what is causing
[Amit Varma]: the problem so is this part of the situation that the fact is at one level
[Amit Varma]: I get it that Indian Medical Association now keeps protesting that there are so
[Amit Varma]: many quacks now at one level I get the argument that listen the state is in
[Amit Varma]: there proper doctors aren't there but these are people who might be able to
[Amit Varma]: help in some way so let's not demonize them I get that argument but at the same
[Amit Varma]: time could these just be placebo doctors in the sense they're not doctors at all
[Amit Varma]: and these are not you know you feel good that you're going to someone and he's
[Guest]: giving you medicine but you were gonna get better anyway I don't know the full
[Guest]: answer to that question right because we didn't do a study on placebos now what I
[Guest]: can say is that because we are codifying the quality of treatment right because
[Guest]: in these SP cases we know right we know the underlying ailment and see you're
[Guest]: absolutely right that in the majority of the case you actually don't need
[Guest]: medication right but the truth is the reason you want the doctor is not for
[Guest]: your average case but to be able to say are you in that 5% of cases where you
[Guest]: actually need the attention right so in fact the SP case that we have is a case
[Guest]: where people the patient walks in and says I have had some pain in my chest
[Guest]: okay and now this could be anything from a heart attack on the extreme or it
[Guest]: could just be that I had a slight sprain and that I slept in the wrong posture
[Guest]: and like 9 times out of 10 it'll turn out to be completely benign correct but
[Guest]: the reason you go to the doctor is not to get the treatment but to kind of get
[Guest]: the pathway of questioning to say is there so which is why the right
[Guest]: questions you ask are you know what is the nature of the pain is that a
[Guest]: throbbing pain is a vibrating pain like it is a repulsating pain right so the
[Guest]: point of the doctor is not to cure you but to then identify whether you need
[Guest]: referral to something more right I mean so the which is why the cases are
[Guest]: designed you know precisely right I mean to reflect symptoms that I think in one
[Guest]: of the cases it's like I have a hard time breathing okay so now it could be
[Guest]: asthma which needs training or it could be just an allergy or it could be you
[Guest]: know some short-term adverse reaction to something so again the cases are
[Guest]: designed in a way as to be cases where you can measure both omission and
[Guest]: commission the bottom line is coming back to the absolute quality of care in
[Guest]: our data right if you say what fraction of these providers correctly give you
[Guest]: the correct treatment it is abysmally low okay it is only about 15% in the
[Guest]: public sector and about 22% in the private so that's why I said the private
[Guest]: is better it's 50% better but in absolute levels it's still abysmally low
[Guest]: okay now but these guys are mostly unqualified but where it gets very
[Guest]: interesting if you look at public versus private is because the problem here is
[Guest]: the qualifications of these guys are different right so if you want to really
[Guest]: isolate the effect of private sector incentives so the really cool part of
[Guest]: the study is then we found the same doctors right so the same guy in his
[Guest]: public practice and private practice so now the knowledge is constant and what
[Guest]: we did it over a period of time he got the same case in both his public and
[Guest]: private practice obviously with different actors like you know it's not
[Guest]: Amit going to both the practices like you know I mean but the same case and
[Guest]: what you saw was that the quality of care was better in the private practice
[Guest]: on every measure right so there is higher effort there is more likely to be
[Guest]: a correct treatment you know there's less likely to be unnecessary treatment
[Guest]: so in every way that there is more effort being put in okay so to answer
[Guest]: your question about the larger gamut of rural health care and saying how much of
[Guest]: this is just placebo I think you know my view on this is that yes only about 15
[Guest]: to 20 percent of the cases actually got it correct now does that mean the
[Guest]: remaining 80 percent are placebo possibly no because a lot of what they
[Guest]: are giving is also what we call palliative relief right like I mean so
[Guest]: it may not cure your underlying symptom but it is still giving you some utility
[Guest]: in terms of you know making you able to go back to work okay now the question of
[Guest]: course is that steroid or whatever thing they're giving you as a painkiller what
[Guest]: long-term cost is it coming at and then it goes into this very complicated issue
[Guest]: of what is the patient's discount rate right so if this is a patient who says I
[Guest]: need to get better today because if I don't work I don't have food to put on
[Guest]: the table then can you really blame the doctor or the patient like you know I
[Guest]: mean for over medicating on the palliative stuff if that's what allows
[Guest]: the patient to get back to work okay so I think that's what makes this so
[Guest]: difficult now maybe I'll pause here and then we can come back and talk maybe we
[Guest]: should switch to talking about policy right because I think it's very very
[Guest]: very difficult I think Ajay's view on this was we just don't even know enough
[Guest]: that we just need to spend time collecting data like you know I have
[Guest]: some views at least on principles of how I would structure policy based on kind
[Guest]: of the work in the evidence we have and you know maybe we should switch to that
[Guest]: and that way we can you know bring all these facts together to say because right
[Guest]: now it almost feels like I've given you this you know broad smorgasbord of facts
[Guest]: but organizing this into saying how do we take this understanding into thinking
[Guest]: about policy is then something that I need to spend some time on you know
[Amit Varma]: which we can do next so a couple of things I want to double-click into and
[Amit Varma]: this might take us into the realm of policy but even if it doesn't we'll talk
[Amit Varma]: about policy anyway after this and here are the two things I want to double
[Amit Varma]: click into one is talking about public incentives and the other is private
[Amit Varma]: competence and when we speak about the public health system right we've got the
[Amit Varma]: five-tier system we've notionally got all these doctors in every village in
[Amit Varma]: every town in every district whatever but there is high absenteeism right now
[Amit Varma]: the classical explanation for why private always performs better than
[Amit Varma]: public is incentives because in public you've got a tenured job there's no
[Amit Varma]: accountability and you know those are your incentives and that's how it
[Amit Varma]: functions so first question what are the ways to improve these incentives like
[Amit Varma]: once we take it for grant because you know the public reflects is there
[Amit Varma]: repeatedly like an education they will ignore the free option and they'll go to
[Amit Varma]: a paid private guy clearly something is seriously wrong now if we accept that
[Amit Varma]: the market can't take care of everything in something like health care then in
[Amit Varma]: that case we have to focus on this and we have to figure out better incentives
[Amit Varma]: one way like we discussed is more local government but that isn't going to
[Amit Varma]: happen anytime soon and that in any case we will discuss in our episode on
[Amit Varma]: federalism so what are the sort of ways of improving these public incentives for
[Guest]: public health care workers yeah so this is a great question and maybe I will
[Guest]: park it for the policy piece but let me say one other important thing right that
[Guest]: what is really interesting about why we call the paper to India's is like if you
[Guest]: look and say Tamil Nadu Kerala and some of the better performing states it's
[Guest]: that not only do they deliver better care but they also deliver it at a much
[Guest]: lower cost per patient okay so how are they achieving higher quality and lower
[Guest]: cost it's because the utilization of the doctor is higher okay because the
[Guest]: biggest cost in the system is your doctor's salary right but if people have
[Guest]: confidence in the public system that everybody is coming right then your cost
[Guest]: per patient is actually lower and the equilibrium has unraveled where you know
[Guest]: not only are they not that good but if you don't know if they are there you're
[Guest]: not even going to show up okay so the patient doesn't go and then you kind of
[Guest]: the whole thing unravels into a low level equilibrium right so I think it
[Guest]: just highlights the broader value of investing in public systems okay now
[Guest]: this is spoken from as somebody who has documented that the private incentives
[Guest]: do better but my overall view in terms of architecting systems of service
[Guest]: delivery is that the public and private both have their weaknesses they have
[Guest]: different pathologies right so at one level a public provider should be able
[Guest]: to do better why because there is no profit motive and therefore you don't
[Guest]: have to kind of charge more to make the fat cat salaries of your corporate
[Guest]: executives who are running the private firms at another level they have scale
[Guest]: in procurement okay so it gives you volume discounts whether it's on your
[Guest]: medication or your supplies you have scale in terms of cost of capital if you
[Guest]: need to borrow for infrastructure and you have the the natural scale that
[Guest]: comes from being so combination of lack of profit motive and combination of
[Guest]: economies of scale all else being equal should make the public a potentially
[Guest]: better provider right like of value for money in than the private guy but the
[Guest]: elephant in the room of course is incentives right so what the private guy
[Guest]: has is much better incentives right so essentially he doesn't get paid if he
[Guest]: doesn't show up right I mean whereas the the public guy once you have the salary
[Guest]: so you know one very interesting way of thinking about public versus private in
[Guest]: the covert context is like you know is the public unions fight to stay shut the
[Guest]: private guys fight to open right mean and that itself is a very telling this
[Guest]: thing about you know the distinction of the incentives because these you only
[Guest]: get paid right if you're there okay so now and which is why I think the public
[Guest]: versus private debate itself is so different and should be different in
[Guest]: different parts of the way okay so I think if you and part of the nuance in
[Guest]: that AR paper right where we kind of allude to the fact that can arrow was
[Guest]: not fully right it's always a dangerous proposition to start a paper saying that
[Guest]: can arrow was wrong so you know because like the most brilliant economists of
[Guest]: the 20th century but you know the caveat is not that he's wrong but that he was
[Guest]: right only in the setting he had seen like you know he had not actually seen
[Guest]: what the Wild West of kind of health care in rural India looks like right so
[Guest]: in fact as an aside sometimes it's interesting right how some of the great
[Guest]: ideas and modern applied microeconomics that won Nobel Prizes like you know for
[Guest]: people like Stiglitz and Akerlof actually came when they spent a year in
[Guest]: developing countries right so Joe Stiglitz spent a year in Kenya Akerlof
[Guest]: wrote his lemons paper from his time in India when you know it's like studying
[Guest]: development economics is a little bit like studying pathology in medicine so
[Guest]: pathology is you look at the dead patient and saying what did not work
[Guest]: right so when something is working you don't see how beautiful it is that all
[Guest]: parts of the system are working right so it's only when something is
[Guest]: dysfunctional that you then go and understand the importance of things you
[Guest]: took for granted institutionally right I mean and so similarly for kind of
[Guest]: Western educated economists who kind of model the world in a certain way you
[Guest]: know you put them in a developing country where these kind of markets
[Guest]: don't exist and then you kind of say oh my god wait like you know there is all
[Guest]: of these problems of asymmetric information and then they kind of
[Guest]: embellish their models for this you know work that then went and won a Nobel
[Guest]: Prize but anyway so maybe my point here is if Arrow had spent time in rural India
[Guest]: like you know he would have modified like you know some of his his his
[Guest]: theorems as well but what we are basically showing we have this theoretical
[Guest]: model in that AR paper right where we say that listen market incentives are
[Guest]: both good and bad okay because what we see in the pricing equation is that the
[Guest]: price a doctor charges is correlated with observable measures of effort right
[Guest]: so the price is higher if I spend more time the price is higher if I do more
[Guest]: checklist items and the price is higher if I give you more medication okay
[Guest]: because those are things that the patient can see now what is really
[Guest]: ironic is that there is no price premium for giving the correct treatment because
[Guest]: the patient doesn't know the treatment is correct okay but unconditionally you
[Guest]: are paid more if you give the correct treatment because when you give more
[Guest]: medicines you are mechanically more likely to also give a correct treatment
[Guest]: okay so it's like you know you throw the kitchen sink at it and something will
[Guest]: stick okay so but the subtle point is this that doctor incentives of say
[Guest]: private incentives are good because it gives you incentives to work harder for
[Guest]: the patient to come back to you but it also gives you negative incentives for
[Guest]: over prescribing right I mean and so the question is how do you find the right
[Guest]: balance between having enough incentives for effort but not enough incentives for
[Guest]: overtreatment right and that's the delicate balance we're trying to find
[Guest]: now the traditional modern Western medicine approach for this is you train
[Guest]: a medical ethics you know you try to train with say Hippocratic Oath and you
[Guest]: kind of have a group of peers and you have a strong liability regime that says
[Guest]: if you're found to have violated what is kind of standard practice you so there
[Guest]: are other institutional ways of kind of checking this right but the general
[Guest]: sense in the US is that the better working health systems are ones that
[Guest]: don't give doctors too much incentives but you want to weaken their incentives
[Guest]: and focus more on kind of intrinsic motivation of quality of care so if you
[Guest]: look at say a Mayo Clinic where the doctors are paid on a flat salary with
[Guest]: not that much kind of you know bonuses based on procedures the sense is that
[Guest]: you get better care there what Ajay was saying what a CMC Velo does like you
[Guest]: know I mean so at the high end of kind of the healthcare system the best
[Guest]: systems are where you have well-trained doctors who have a strong sense of
[Guest]: ethics and who are practicing in a community of peers whereby you kind of
[Guest]: reinforce good practice because of the norms that are built around you okay now
[Guest]: the problem is like you know when you come to India we are at the opposite end
[Guest]: of that right which is that the effort in the public sector is so low that the
[Guest]: marginal incentives so here's what happens right when I increase your
[Guest]: incentives I'm increasing incentives for diagnostic effort but I'm also
[Guest]: increasing incentives for overtreatment right but the returns to that diagnostic
[Guest]: effort is diminishing in how much time I'm spending right so in the US if my
[Guest]: default interaction is 20 minutes with the patient then the marginal returns to
[Guest]: more diagnostic effort is not that high but in India if it's two minutes right
[Guest]: then the marginal return to that extra diagnostic effort is high so part of
[Guest]: what we argue in that model is there's a crossing property that if you're at a
[Guest]: very low level of baseline effort then having more incentives is actually
[Guest]: better because those benefits outweigh the costs right I mean whereas if you
[Guest]: are at a point where the baseline effort is already high now putting incentives
[Guest]: backfires because now I'm incentivizing overtreatment okay so it just kind of
[Guest]: highlights how difficult these issues are but coming back to the Indian
[Guest]: setting and policy and maybe we'll take a short break and come back is that
[Guest]: that architecting systems where so that you have some incentives but not too
[Guest]: much is kind of what is the really delicate balance of this and hopefully
[Guest]: we can talk I'll I'll talk through some ideas for that when we get there and and
[Amit Varma]: my other sort of double-click question before we get there one of course was
[Amit Varma]: about incentives in the public sector but the other is about the competence of
[Amit Varma]: the private sector in the sense you pointed out that look most people are
[Amit Varma]: going to private providers a very small percentage of these are properly trained
[Amit Varma]: MBBS guys and even a large percentage of the MBBS guys aren't particularly
[Amit Varma]: competent when it comes to all these checklist vignettes and all that so
[Amit Varma]: then the question is how do we solve for this because like Ajay pointed out in
[Amit Varma]: his episode he used a telling phrase that look it's expensive to manufacture
[Amit Varma]: a doctor which is true and there are supply constraints like the Indian
[Amit Varma]: Medical Council had run an episode on this once you know the group of doctors
[Amit Varma]: and they act like they kind of cartelize the whole thing there they you know
[Amit Varma]: restrict the supply of doctors and that's a separate problem and assume for
[Amit Varma]: a moment that that that is just there it is how it is it is expensive to
[Amit Varma]: manufacture a doctor so can something like AI play a part in this like Ajay
[Amit Varma]: spoke about AI plus nurse now that seems an interesting formulation to me because
[Amit Varma]: one AI has come a long way like Eric Topol has this great book called deep
[Amit Varma]: medicine for example about how AI and doctors can work together and two when I
[Amit Varma]: think of this vignetting for example you you have a chest pain or you have a
[Amit Varma]: diarrhea and you go to a doctor and there's a checklist now a checklist can
[Amit Varma]: easily be encoded in an app where you know it doesn't have diagnostic
[Amit Varma]: authority or whatever but you can go through the checklist and at the end of
[Amit Varma]: it you can say okay I don't need to go to a doc I'll just drink some salt water
[Amit Varma]: and I'll see if I'm better tomorrow or it's not pulsating so I don't really
[Amit Varma]: need to worry I probably slept in the wrong position or whatever I'm just
[Amit Varma]: thinking aloud I mean that's this is by no means a medical this thing so you
[Amit Varma]: know can technology in a sense save us not as you know not in terms of
[Amit Varma]: replacing doctors but maybe as a tool to doctors maybe as a tool for these
[Amit Varma]: informal doctors where you know it serve with them. No absolutely and you know I think the
[Guest]: most of the policy solutions I'll talk about will have a technology layer right
[Guest]: and I think one way to think about this is that technology in any sector okay
[Guest]: whether it's education whether it's health and you know other examples
[Guest]: technology is a force multiplier but again for the technology to be effective
[Guest]: you need to first understand what the binding constraint is and then make sure
[Guest]: the technology is targeting that binding constraint and one of the things we did
[Guest]: not talk about in our education episode is we didn't talk about education
[Guest]: technology right I mean and so since I haven't done research on technology in
[Guest]: health but I have done research on technology in education let me give you
[Guest]: this quick analogy right which is in theory the technology can do amazing
[Guest]: things okay it can help give you high quality content with the best professors
[Guest]: for everybody it can help you know make the material more interactive more
[Guest]: engaging it can customize the learning it can shorten the feedback loop it can
[Guest]: do all of these great things okay so and therefore you have a lot of tech
[Guest]: evangelism in education till you go look at the data if you go look at the actual
[Guest]: RCT evidence on technology in education you'll find that the results are all
[Guest]: over the place okay there are cases where the impacts on learning are
[Guest]: negative there are cases where there are zero and there are cases where it is
[Guest]: positive right so you know and it is negative in cases where people are
[Guest]: blindly giving computers to teenagers and who are then spending a lot more
[Guest]: time playing games you know it's neutral in cases where I just give you a laptop
[Guest]: okay and it is positive when I take the effort to integrate pedagogy with the
[Guest]: technology right so I think my quick answer to this is technology can be a
[Guest]: huge force multiplier but there are two or three key caveats one is kind of
[Guest]: making sure that it is designed to address the binding constraints and
[Guest]: making sure that we are designing the incentives for the innovation to solve
[Guest]: at scale for populations without purchasing power right because the
[Guest]: problem is if you look at innovation innovation is typical and this is true
[Guest]: in edtech as well right that innovation is driven at the right tail of the
[Guest]: distribution where there is the paying customer that is what you really want is
[Guest]: to direct that innovation like you know at the bottom of the pyramid and that
[Guest]: that's where again you need the government to kind of play a little bit
[Guest]: of an enabling role and maybe that's a good place to start right like you know
[Guest]: when we get into the detailed discussion on policy so let's talk about policy now
[Amit Varma]: you know we know the problems I we know some of the problems we in fact we think
[Amit Varma]: we know the problems and then they like you said is very vexatious where do we
[Amit Varma]: begin to think in terms of fixing these problems you know so let me start first
[Guest]: with some core principles of public finance right which is so Indian health
[Guest]: expenditure is overall health expenditure is comparable to other say
[Guest]: South Asian countries but public health expenditure is lower okay so there's a
[Guest]: lot more out-of-pocket spending so I think there's definitely room for
[Guest]: increase in public spending on health now but it is incredibly important to
[Guest]: think about the cost-effectiveness of that spending because again a big part
[Guest]: of the research is how much variation there is in different ways of spending
[Guest]: that money right so first let's start with the first principles of public
[Guest]: finance of saying if I were to have a marginal increase in health expenditure
[Guest]: where should that go okay and where it should first and foremost go are in the
[Guest]: public goods right mean and that is public health preventive health that
[Guest]: works at a population level and again as I said this but this is so important
[Guest]: it's worth reinforcing again and again and again right I mean that you know
[Guest]: oxygen cylinders and ventilators are not public health right I mean so the mind
[Guest]: gets concentrated on the immediate life-saving device and the constraint
[Guest]: okay but that is still essentially a private good that provides health care
[Guest]: to one person okay and it is rival it is excludable okay now what is public
[Guest]: health say in the COVID context public health would be things like and I'll
[Guest]: talk specifically about COVID later would be things like universal masking
[Guest]: right that can mean where there are public goods and externalities and we'll
[Guest]: talk about that but even more basically things like air pollution okay so my
[Guest]: first and almost counterintuitive message on health policy is that
[Guest]: sometimes the most effective return on investments may lie completely outside
[Guest]: the health department okay so when we think about health policy we think about
[Guest]: what is the Ministry of Health do but the Ministry of Health basically again
[Guest]: like I just said thinks of itself mainly as a PSU running the public health care
[Guest]: system okay but that is not health that is not well-being that's not quality of
[Guest]: life okay so for example I would say the single most important thing we could do
[Guest]: for population health is actually fix air pollution in North India okay and so
[Guest]: the calculations on this just show that the costs are of the orders of you know
[Guest]: just several hundreds of billions of dollars right I mean and whether it's
[Guest]: the life expectancy whether it's the health is adjusted life expectancy the
[Guest]: returns on fixing that are huge now the problem is that we have boxed our
[Guest]: environmental discourse in two ways okay one it has been framed as a trade-off
[Guest]: between kind of industrialization and economic activity versus environmental
[Guest]: regulation okay so the greens are essentially pitched as presented as
[Guest]: being anti growth okay and so somehow there is this trade-off and then you
[Guest]: know and there's also obviously virtue signaling sometimes from the
[Guest]: environmental folks and so that's one kind of trap we get stuck in okay of
[Guest]: green versus growth okay which is mistake number one second mistake we
[Guest]: make is we kind of get caught in the politics of kind of global climate
[Guest]: change negotiations right I mean where we say that listen the West has done its
[Guest]: and has polluted and so now like you know we need our space to pollute okay
[Guest]: like you know for us to grow but you know but that is like cutting your nose
[Guest]: to spite your face because forget the global externalities right just the
[Guest]: domestic health externalities alone like you know make this a first-order crisis
[Guest]: that you want to work on right so now and that brings me back to why I
[Guest]: actually think the high petrol taxes are a good thing okay and that's because see
[Guest]: holding as a government when you need to raise revenue any government needs
[Guest]: revenue for its core operations right now so what is public finance 101 again
[Guest]: it's very obvious but we don't really think about it this way because most
[Guest]: governments in the revenue department thinks about their target for how much
[Guest]: revenue I'm raising okay but there is a separate point of not quantity of
[Guest]: revenue but quality of revenue right what is the quality of your revenue and
[Guest]: there the public finance 101 is to say that you want to tax bags and not goods
[Guest]: correct so if I tax labor supply I am reducing your incentives to work and
[Guest]: that is bad okay but if I tax alcohol or if I tax pollution right mean then I'm
[Guest]: raising my revenue but I'm also getting the price right or closer to what is
[Guest]: socially optimal okay so just like those first principles right now of course you
[Guest]: could argue that with say high petrol taxes there is inflationary pressures
[Guest]: across the economy and all of this kind of stuff but overall right like I mean
[Guest]: my meta view is given that the government has certain revenue requiring
[Guest]: you know revenue needs that you're much better off right like I mean taxing
[Guest]: carbon right mean through the form of high gasoline taxes now it's a separate
[Guest]: matter that that is being used to hide and cover a bunch of other fiscal
[Guest]: mismanagement but my preferred way of communicating the health value of the
[Guest]: petrol taxes would be to say that you justify this and saying we are doing
[Guest]: this because we're going to take these taxes and reinvest in public transport
[Guest]: reinvest in you know public health so one of the chapters in the whole book is
[Guest]: on the revenue side of public finance right so I think one of the other
[Guest]: problems of state capacity we have in India is that the fiscal compact between
[Guest]: the state and the citizen is broken okay which is because the taxpaying classes
[Guest]: have completely seceded from being recipients of services you kind of see
[Guest]: that the tax is going into this black hole called the government that wastes
[Guest]: all your money which means that's evasion almost becomes all you know
[Guest]: quasi justified in the evasion evading classes saying area like you know anyway
[Guest]: the government is going to waste this money okay so part of state capacity is
[Guest]: also reestablishing the fiscal compact right mean that as citizens when you pay
[Guest]: taxes you can expect a certain amount of public goods and services and this takes
[Guest]: me back to urban right so one of the I talk much more about property taxes and
[Guest]: why I think we need more decentralization property taxes is it
[Guest]: allows you to build a better connection in the taxpayers mind between the taxes
[Guest]: that are being paid in the services that are being received as opposed to taxes
[Guest]: going into this black hole called the government right so if you did the same
[Guest]: thing with the carbon taxes and saying yes I am charging this for petrol but
[Guest]: there is a reason and that's because here are all the environmental costs
[Guest]: here at all the congestion costs and we are going to take this money and they're
[Guest]: going to you know I think government of Delhi got pilloried a little bit for
[Guest]: saying like you know free bus tickets for women or something but you know you
[Guest]: know it subsidizing mass public transit is actually a wonderful thing like you
[Guest]: know because you're also cross subsidizing that from the car owning class so they
[Guest]: might cry you know from the rooftops but that is good policy it's good policy to
[Guest]: increase the cost of carbon like you mean and use that for you know higher
[Guest]: density more efficient mass transport and if you were able to make that ring
[Guest]: fencing so that the taxpayer understands that I think that's actually a good
[Guest]: policy okay so that's you know just one aside on that now the other places where
[Guest]: the highest returns to public spending may happen outside the health ministry
[Guest]: we already talked about this is in the context of infrastructure like you know
[Guest]: so Rhodes was one piece but a broadband is another okay so then coming back to
[Guest]: how do you get quality of care to remote areas right because the problem today we
[Guest]: talk about doctor absence but frankly you know I remember presenting this
[Guest]: doctor absence paper in 2004 some at the World Bank and I think somebody from
[Guest]: Russia had this very insightful comment when he said you know even Stalin could
[Guest]: not get his doctors to go to remote areas okay like you know now maybe the
[Guest]: Tamil Nadu Stalin will succeed because it's you know it's different but you
[Guest]: know even the Russian Stalin could not get doctors in remote rural areas
[Guest]: because you know they're just they're too educated to want to live in the rural
[Guest]: areas and the utilization is too low okay so one of the ways technology or
[Guest]: broadband or these things can help is them leveraging that kind of higher
[Guest]: qualified doctor to be able to cater to larger populations so now the question
[Guest]: is when we look at the infrastructure budget the health ministry is not even
[Guest]: thinking about this right so at the very least what I would like is to a finance
[Guest]: department is thinking about these allocations find a way to quantify say
[Guest]: the health benefits or something like this and you know and therefore put
[Guest]: correspondingly more money in some of those broader public goods that will
[Guest]: have higher return so that's one principle okay a public goods now the
[Guest]: other piece which I'll then come to is public health preventive health primary
[Guest]: care and I'll come to that in a moment but I'll pause and let you come in no I
[Amit Varma]: will just sort of express my disagreement about the petrol thing
[Amit Varma]: because number of reasons number one even this government I hope they don't
[Amit Varma]: get the idea from listening to this podcast but even this government hasn't
[Amit Varma]: presented it as a syntax or a carbon tax or as equivalent to oh we are taxing
[Amit Varma]: alcohol so the guy won't go and beat up his wife secondly I think you think of
[Amit Varma]: it only as something that emits carbon and pollutes the air and is bad for
[Amit Varma]: health is a problem because I think the positive externalities are far greater
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that I don't see how you can argue for building roads at one end
[Amit Varma]: and at the same time for taxing petrol more at the other I think you should
[Amit Varma]: build roads and not tax petrol or keep the taxes as low as possible for the
[Amit Varma]: same damn reason because people getting around becomes you know so much easier
[Amit Varma]: and that's so much better for the economy that's so much better for
[Guest]: everybody's overall well you build the roads and kind of you subsidize the mass
[Guest]: transit right like you know so you do the buses and not the cars you see
[Guest]: that's the basic point so it's not so there is still higher density transport
[Guest]: right all else being equal higher density is going to sure but my point is
[Amit Varma]: that after you fix that public transit then you do whatever when people are
[Amit Varma]: using that see what is happening here is that the state is failing in all these
[Amit Varma]: ways and then it is and this is a common story in India the state will fail
[Amit Varma]: completely and it will tell private guys you also can't do and this seems similar
[Amit Varma]: to that we don't have that public transit which brings me to my other
[Amit Varma]: objection where you speak about how it's a good idea if you tax carbon because
[Amit Varma]: then you can reinvest some money in public transport and this and that and
[Amit Varma]: all of that but no yeah the money is going into statues and Central Vista and
[Guest]: all of these other things but you can't have it both ways right you can't say I
[Guest]: want state capacity and you can't so I think but this is the challenge right so
[Guest]: there's the public choice view that says listen like politicians are venal and
[Guest]: they're gonna take our tax money and they essentially kind of do their vanity
[Guest]: projects in which case you should shrink the state and just kind of get away you
[Guest]: know just forget then why are we talking about state capacity right because we
[Guest]: don't trust the state okay now the flip side of that is that this goes back to
[Guest]: my point about the plane that is India right I mean and so the private option
[Guest]: essentially has worked for the people who are flying first in business class
[Guest]: right I mean who have kind of seceded from the state but the reason there is
[Guest]: no question of kind of giving up on the state is multiple things right so one is
[Guest]: there are certain core functions like justice and law that the state has a
[Guest]: natural monopoly in okay second in terms of actual public goods public health
[Guest]: environment vector control you know again private for all the private
[Guest]: philanthropy and initiative there is no substitute for the sheer scale and
[Guest]: coordination that comes from getting the government to do its job okay I think
[Guest]: the answer is just more engagement by the elites right I mean so in the end so
[Guest]: in this way I think I'm more you know on the Ashwin Mahesh side of things right I
[Guest]: think you guys had the same back and forth right where Ashwin was talking
[Guest]: about you know what we need to do to take back the government right I mean so
[Amit Varma]: there is no no I I agree with that aspect of it my my problem here is that
[Amit Varma]: you are proposing a real-world action which is tax patrol more based on a
[Amit Varma]: utopian argument that the you know that it will be okay to tax patrol more more
[Amit Varma]: if the state can do all of these things the state is not doing any of those
[Amit Varma]: things and the other point I want to make is that when you talk about the
[Amit Varma]: India plane and the rich can buy private goods and all of that the point is roads
[Amit Varma]: are good for everyone including the poor and I would argue that keeping petrol
[Guest]: prices low are also good for everyone including the poor so I think let's put
[Guest]: it this way right there are two separate questions okay one is what does the
[Guest]: government do with any amount of money okay the second is saying that that we
[Guest]: want the government to make certain core investments right means so suppose there
[Guest]: is a menu of investments post COVID right that we say these are clearly high
[Guest]: return public investments okay now there is always a possibility of saying we
[Guest]: will not raise taxes let's cut down all of our inefficient spending okay and
[Guest]: then move it to the more efficient ones okay which would be my preferred outcome
[Guest]: okay now the political reality of reforms and expenditure is that it's
[Guest]: very very hard to change existing patterns of spending what you can do is
[Guest]: when there is additional money you can use that in a better way okay now one
[Guest]: way is to say that along with growth as the budgets grow you know you use that
[Guest]: marginal extra money to do better things and don't raise taxes but on the other
[Guest]: hand if the Department of Revenue is given a target and saying like I want
[Guest]: you to raise so much money okay and that is coming from the political bosses now
[Guest]: the revenue department then has a choice of saying am I going to raise income
[Guest]: taxes am I going to raise GST or am I going to raise petrol taxes or am I going
[Guest]: to raise alcohol taxes my submission is very simple that conditional on the
[Guest]: given target of revenue the petrol tax and the alcohol tax are better forms of
[Guest]: tax than income tax and GST because this is disincentivizing a good and that is
[Guest]: disincentivizing all else equal something that is generating negative
[Guest]: externality right so that's all so for example look at the Tamil Nadu versus
[Guest]: Bihar right I mean the Bihar model of prohibition is like fiscal folly
[Guest]: written all over it right like I mean whereas the Tamil Nadu model is saying
[Guest]: like you know people are going to drink so instead of taking that underground
[Guest]: like I mean you know the TASMAC system is responsible for a very large part of
[Guest]: kind of state revenue in Tamil Nadu but then they send it back into welfare
[Guest]: programs and put money into women's accounts which is I think overall a
[Guest]: much much better way of doing things like you know I mean in the Bihar model
[Guest]: so anyway I think there is a meta discussion about the size of the state
[Guest]: and the fact that the state is this and this is classic Musgrave Buchanan right
[Guest]: public economics versus public choice and I think here's the other problem
[Guest]: right the other problem is where you are in India is again because of the
[Guest]: political pressures the pressure on the government doing things is always going
[Guest]: to be there so you and I can sit and have a hypothetical discussion of saying
[Guest]: government should not be doing this but pressure to I a revenue to the taxman is
[Guest]: coming after you you like it or not okay so all I'm saying is that holding a
[Guest]: revenue envelope constant the revenue the the petrol tax is a better way of
[Guest]: hitting that than something else right so that's fair enough I'm but what it
[Amit Varma]: really amounts to is see I think a tax on petrol is a tax on the poor because
[Amit Varma]: it will have an inflationary effect on everything else the prices of everything
[Guest]: goes up including the salt and the so it depends on what you're doing with that
[Guest]: right so if that revenue is then being coming back into funding say like you
[Guest]: know the primary health care the poor use if the revenue is coming back to
[Guest]: fund say an extra worker in the ICDS system then it in net net ends up being
[Amit Varma]: much more progressive so again yeah but you know the thing is if my aunt was my
[Amit Varma]: uncle she'd be a man this is like that only my point is that what what is
[Amit Varma]: really happening here is that the rich sitting in their first class in the
[Amit Varma]: plane are saying fine tax the poor you know so anyway but we can discuss this
[Guest]: some other time but it goes back to kind of saying all I'm saying is yes we have
[Guest]: a real problem right we have so and some what is interesting is I get attacked
[Guest]: from both the left and the right right like you know so the left things like
[Amit Varma]: you know sorry I get attacked from the left for pushing so much in terms of
[Guest]: cost-effectiveness cost-effectiveness cost-effectiveness right like you know
[Guest]: and I get attacked from the right like you know for feeling that I have this
[Guest]: naive kind of optimism in the state right mean and so I guess the middle
[Guest]: ground I'm trying to occupy is to say at one level the state needs to do more
[Guest]: things at another level it is so inefficient right like you mean that
[Guest]: let's push it to kind of increase on the things that are cost-effective that have
[Guest]: high ROI and then conditional on doing that like I mean is it worth funding it
[Guest]: the answer is yes but just like I just said in the context of the book with
[Guest]: Kelkar if the marginal cost of raising every rupee of tax revenue is in fact
[Guest]: three rupees then the ROI threshold of what you do with tax revenue needs to be
[Guest]: over 3x for you to actually do the tax so that I'm fully agreed that we should
[Guest]: resist kind of a blind expansion of the state because the default quality of
[Guest]: expenditure is so bad now you may come back and say that listen in fact I was
[Guest]: talking to finance minister last year who wanted to raise tax revenue I told
[Guest]: him I said in good conscience I cannot you know I cannot just commit to raising
[Guest]: revenue unless you commit to me that you're going to do good things with it
[Guest]: because otherwise you're just kind of attacking the poor taxpayer right like
[Guest]: I mean for your next vanity but this was a government that had some commitment to
[Guest]: you know service delivery right so that but that was a side conversation right
[Guest]: in which we did have so anyway so I think coming back to where we are in
[Amit Varma]: health policy and yeah I'll put a final aside because you mentioned Ajay's
[Amit Varma]: episode and I'll again point out that Ajay and Vijay Kelkar wrote this great
[Amit Varma]: book called in service of the Republic and we've discussed this concept of how
[Amit Varma]: every rupee spent by the government has an opportunity cost as it were of three
[Amit Varma]: rupees from the economy three rupees of growth so we discussed that in an
[Amit Varma]: episode which I will link from the show notes and finally I will just you know
[Amit Varma]: make one little point that it is not that I am criticizing your optimism of
[Amit Varma]: what the state can do I am saying that yes I admire the effort to make the
[Amit Varma]: state more responsive and to make it do better things but that should not take
[Amit Varma]: the shape of the assumption that the government will do everything right
[Unknown]: which then becomes a justification for all kinds of nonsense you know just as
[Amit Varma]: we talk about market failure we never talk about government failure we compare
[Amit Varma]: market failure with a European idea of what the state will do but the point is
[Guest]: government failure is more ubiquitous I'm not making that case at all right
[Guest]: most of my research has in fact been about documenting the government waste
[Guest]: right so so I think in that way again my view is closer to Ashwin right I mean
[Guest]: that you can't say that listen the state does bad things because we are the state
[Guest]: right I mean so to somehow I think to assume that at some level take a state
[Amit Varma]: you know but you know why I started to interrupt you but I'll object to that
[Amit Varma]: that saying that we are the state because you could have made the same
[Amit Varma]: argument during the British times I would argue that the state that we are
[Amit Varma]: saddled with today is the same colonial state with a different set you know how
[Amit Varma]: would that argument have gone down if you were to tell Gandhi or Nehru that or
[Guest]: Savarkar or whoever that listen that you know this is the big difference and I
[Guest]: can't remember which I think it was Ajay again who said this right because you
[Guest]: keep saying state coercion I mean the whole point of a democratic state is
[Guest]: that any coercion that happens happens at the willingness of the people in fact
[Guest]: one of the sections of my final chapter is on making democracy work better right
[Guest]: and some of this has to do with institutional rules reforms whatever so
[Guest]: essentially when I'm saying we are the state I'm just saying that in a
[Guest]: democracy right if people will not engage right you can't then expect that
[Guest]: you know magically good things are going to happen right so that's all so you
[Guest]: know a different way of saying this is if the competent refuse to participate
[Guest]: then competent will take over right I mean so you can't sit and then complain
[Guest]: about what the state is and which is why my steer to people in civil society who
[Guest]: care about improving the public good is yes you see in a way competent people
[Guest]: want to kind of be in a setting with their locus of control is high right so
[Guest]: you don't want to take on the state because it's this beast that is so far
[Guest]: outside kind of your your grasp so to speak right but again given that that is
[Guest]: the beast that is spending these hundreds of thousands of crores right
[Guest]: the returns to fixing that beast or tweaking that beast to start getting
[Guest]: more effective and like Ashwin said like starting to engage with local
[Guest]: government starting to engage with like you know the public sphere in your
[Guest]: immediate vicinity is in fact a good thing so in fact in the education
[Guest]: episode I didn't mention this but you know Howard Gardner at Harvard I think
[Guest]: had you know recognizing that education is the needs of an education system are
[Guest]: different different parts of the socio-economic distribution I think had
[Guest]: this wonderful quote once where he said that listen first-generation learners
[Guest]: need like functional skills right middle classes need more engagement and that's
[Guest]: because you're all caught in your own treadmills of you know meeting your
[Guest]: whatever private deadlines and kind of oblivious to the public and elites need
[Guest]: more ethics right because the elites kind of have the luxury of kind of not
[Guest]: being on a daily treadmill but like I mean if you have kind of created a
[Guest]: culture where the elites are more about how do I park my money in tax havens now
[Guest]: at an individual level you don't blame them because they're like okay this
[Guest]: beast of the state is going to waste my money so but then you're starting to see
[Guest]: at least in India a lot of philanthropy a lot of kind of elites really starting
[Guest]: to engage in shaping kind of the larger public ecosystem in which we live in and
[Guest]: so that's my plea my plea then is to the middle classes to say that we need more
[Guest]: engagement right I mean you can't step aside and somehow think because if you
[Guest]: step aside then your only option is to shrink the state because if you're
[Guest]: stepping aside you're basically saying listen the state is unredeemable and it
[Guest]: is kind of good no downward spiral and then we want to shrink the state and
[Guest]: then give up on state capacity altogether right so let's move on but
[Amit Varma]: before you move on one final statement that you know I think you're being a
[Amit Varma]: little totalitarian when you speak of the people as if it's a monolithic whole
[Amit Varma]: and the people voted these people in or the the people keep the state
[Amit Varma]: accountable and all of that you know that's not true we have to think at the
[Amit Varma]: level of individuals you know there have been tens of thousands if not hundreds
[Amit Varma]: of thousands of deaths that have been caused in India that are needless
[Amit Varma]: because of the apathy and neglect of the dysfunctional state and I'm sorry I'm
[Amit Varma]: not responsible for that right you can say hey the people are the state and all
[Amit Varma]: of that but I am simply not because I have at a personal level been warning
[Amit Varma]: that there will be a second wave been saying vaccinate everyone been railing
[Amit Varma]: against the dysfunctional state ever since I started writing or possibly
[Amit Varma]: since I was in the womb because that's just what it is but anyway as you and I
[Guest]: are going to have a continuing discussion I don't even think we deeply
[Guest]: you know fundamentally disagree in terms of the facts right I think we actually
[Guest]: agree remarkably in the what the facts are and then I think you know the
[Guest]: creative tension is more in terms of how do you move forward like you know I mean
[Guest]: from this morass like you know of where we are so you know I don't think I
[Guest]: disagree I don't think we disagree on the core diagnosis at all so yeah no I'm
[Amit Varma]: with you on the the effort that we have to make in reforming the state but I
[Amit Varma]: also sort of anyway let's leave it for some other discussion as in my whole
[Amit Varma]: podcast is a continuing evolving discussion over hundreds of episodes
[Amit Varma]: with different people so God knows which guest will next contribute to this
[Amit Varma]: discussion let's move on to sort of the policy yeah so coming back to the policy
[Guest]: on healthcare right I think so we've talked a little bit about public
[Guest]: finance public expenditure and value for money right now but thinking about the
[Guest]: creation of you know so I'm gonna say two or three I'm gonna say a few things
[Guest]: on strengthening public systems and then I'm gonna say a few on the private
[Guest]: system given that the private is 75% of actually the distribution of health care
[Guest]: in the country right so on the public side I think the single most important
[Guest]: insight is the following okay which is we have the most expensive part of the
[Guest]: health care system is the doctor right both in terms of the cost of the
[Guest]: training and in terms of the scarcity of supply okay and we are living in this
[Guest]: model of saying we're going to provide universal health care by staffing rural
[Guest]: places with these highly qualified doctors and that has just not worked and
[Guest]: it is not going to work okay so the way we need to think about building our
[Guest]: human resources for health care instead of saying I'm going to take a talented
[Guest]: urban doctor and put them in a rural area it's like can I take a talented
[Guest]: motivated rural person and upskill this person in a way that allows them to be
[Guest]: effective in their communities okay so I think that's like the core mental shift
[Guest]: we need to make and we have and this is not just me right we now have good data
[Guest]: and evidence if you look at what is the part of the health care system in India
[Guest]: that works best okay what works best is we do well on vaccinations we're doing
[Guest]: well on institutional deliveries okay so these key metrics of and vaccinations we
[Guest]: managed to do this year after year with kid after kid now why are we succeeding
[Guest]: is because the most successful part of the health care system right now I would
[Guest]: argue at the ASHA workers okay so the ASHA workers are hired locally in the
[Guest]: village they are typically 8, 10, or 12th pass like you know they're in that range
[Guest]: of education they provided a modest amount of training and importantly that
[Guest]: they are paid on a piece rate basis right so they get a modest stipend but
[Guest]: they are paid for every institutional delivery they are paid for every
[Guest]: vaccination okay so which means that you have taken the local talent you have
[Guest]: upskilled them and you have put them in an overall incentive regime whereby like
[Guest]: I mean there is some continuous reward for ongoing performance okay you know
[Guest]: this model was developed by Dr. Abhay Bang and Rani Bang like you know in
[Guest]: Gachiroli district in Maharashtra you know they have searched and they've done
[Guest]: tons of work over the years of building health systems and capacity in the back
[Guest]: of the beyond so taking that insight into how do we build human resources for
[Guest]: kind of the public health care system my most important push would be something
[Guest]: very similar to what I said for teachers right mean which is you know think about
[Guest]: aggressively expanding nurse training programs right mean but where the nurse
[Guest]: training programs should be heavily practicum based okay so specifically the
[Guest]: model that I have in mind whether it's for education of a nursing is to say
[Guest]: that imagine at every district level you create a district nursing college right
[Guest]: mean that is equipped to train a few hundred nurses a year and you say that
[Guest]: you're going to admit students the top candidates from every panchayat okay and
[Guest]: you will prioritize panchayats where they currently don't have staff okay in
[Guest]: their health system so you are getting an inflow of the top talent 10th pass or
[Guest]: 12th pass as the case might be and the one good news from expanding school
[Guest]: education over the years is now you kind of have at the panchayat level like you
[Guest]: know candidates who have passed 12th and particularly for girls this is really
[Guest]: important because the the cultural barriers to working outside the village
[Guest]: means that the labor force participation falls sharply and you kind of get
[Guest]: married and have kids at some 16 or 18 partly because of that barrier right so
[Guest]: being able to create the structure whereby you say this is a prestigious
[Guest]: program that you're admitted to where the government is paying your fees okay
[Guest]: so you're not actually paying out of pocket but what you're doing over a
[Guest]: three-year or four-year period is you're saying I'm going to get three months of
[Guest]: modular nurse training okay that teaches me in terms of the basics and then nine
[Guest]: months I'm back in my community attached to the subcenter like reporting into the
[Guest]: PHC so there's a regular nurse and doctor I'm reporting into so this then
[Guest]: becomes part of your practicum training where you are starting to provide
[Guest]: primary care okay and you do this for two years or three years and then at the
[Guest]: end of three years in fact I can literally imagine right that they have
[Guest]: their own uniforms and they kind of you know sort of in a quasi official way you
[Guest]: get like one stripe and two stripes and three stripes based on how many years of
[Guest]: your training you're finished right so it also these little subtle markers of
[Guest]: status right mean that it gives you certain official recognition in your
[Guest]: community in your village and so what you're doing and this is where then
[Guest]: technology comes in right because what you're doing is not just doing the three
[Guest]: months training but you're then creating these kind of smartphone based apps as
[Guest]: well as say peer groups okay so that you are constantly exposed and have access
[Guest]: to a community of peers as well as your teachers right so when you're in
[Guest]: practice you can refer both to your immediate supervisor as well as have
[Guest]: access to a virtual network of inputs for how you deal with this the
[Guest]: technology can become incredibly effective as a way of supporting
[Guest]: continuing education okay so today you have to pass an exam and you come in but
[Guest]: once you're in the government service for 30 years or 35 years there is no
[Guest]: kind of ongoing test of whether you're current in your knowledge okay so again
[Guest]: what the US does is saying doctors have to be recertified every 10 years okay
[Guest]: now we don't have the apparatus to do that but imagine that now every
[Guest]: nurse in your government system right has a unique ID and they are expected to
[Guest]: do a certain say 10 or 15 days of training a year but now the training is
[Guest]: essentially on an app where you have curated content and then at the end of
[Guest]: every module of the content you have a test okay so you can take this on your
[Guest]: own time and in fact my chapter on police I talk about the same thing right
[Guest]: that one of the reasons of a police are so horrendously under trained is because
[Guest]: the nature of their job is they have to be on call okay so they have to be
[Guest]: available and they are so understaffed the system cannot spare these poor cops
[Guest]: like I mean to attend a training workshop right but if you can modularize
[Guest]: the training to fit it into the downtime during the day when they're sitting in
[Guest]: the Thana like you know just waiting for things to happen right like I mean so
[Guest]: and that's the same for nurses is the same for a lot of service delivery staff
[Guest]: that there's a lot of downtime right when you're just sitting there waiting
[Guest]: for a patient to come in there are some times when you have a lot of load
[Guest]: sometimes when you're just sitting twiddling your thumbs okay so how do you
[Guest]: use that time efficiently by kind of having modular training that you can
[Guest]: take and you take an exam that you show you have this done so and then once
[Guest]: you've done this kind of modular nurse training you give them a nursing
[Guest]: credential and the good thing about this is this is then valuable in both the
[Guest]: public sector and the private sector right so because the private sector is
[Guest]: 70% of the system you can say that you are creating the human capital the human
[Guest]: resources to absorb into the public system and post them in the sub centers
[Guest]: and areas that are underserved but at a point you are also creating the talent
[Guest]: that allows the private sector to absorb them as well right so coming back to
[Guest]: what the government can do something that Ajay said again is that the
[Guest]: short-run elasticity of medical workers is basically zero right you can't
[Guest]: manufacture a doctor in a crisis you can't manifest so the most important
[Guest]: lesson from all of this is like how do we build the pipeline of human resources
[Guest]: for the healthcare sector but do this in a way that doesn't make the mistake of
[Guest]: saying that I need super fancy qualified doctors everywhere what you really need
[Guest]: is kind of the locally connected public health worker who is then trained and
[Guest]: leveraged with technology like you know to kind of have access to and then this
[Guest]: is a person who knows when they need to refer a complicated case right so coming
[Guest]: back to doing your diagnostics doing your checklist doing a bunch of things
[Guest]: that technology then becomes a force multiplier that you put on top of the
[Guest]: human resource over there right so that would probably be the single most
[Guest]: important thing I would do is to kind of massively expand so going back to your
[Guest]: question of a philanthropist with a hundred million dollars you know so I
[Guest]: would actually say creating these modular training programs and the
[Guest]: templates for this and working particularly in states like UP and Bihar
[Guest]: like I mean to say how do you make these things happen and in the beginning you
[Guest]: will need to bring you know you need to import your trainers you'll need to have
[Guest]: some high quality people creating the content and the modules and stuff like
[Guest]: that but fundamentally right 90% of our problems in India are about supply
[Guest]: constraints right you expand supply and then you know the prices will fall and
[Guest]: things will take care of themselves so I think that's one core point now a
[Guest]: similar point with regard to doctors okay is what Chhattisgarh did with kind
[Guest]: of their rural medical assistant program and I sent you that paper as well so
[Guest]: this they had done for two or three years where you say again you don't need
[Guest]: like this fully trained doctor sitting in the rural area twiddling their thumbs
[Guest]: but can you modularize the training and provide enough medical training that
[Guest]: they can be more effective yeah and I think you know coming to doctor
[Guest]: training I think the same thing applies in the Chhattisgarh experiment which was
[Guest]: unfortunately stopped after two or three years for I think complex political
[Guest]: reasons but the core idea was very very simple that you don't need this fancy
[Guest]: six years of training and put an MBBS in a remote rural area where this person
[Guest]: has no inclination to be and is not being effectively utilized right so they
[Guest]: had this rural medical assistant program where you had people trained for about
[Guest]: three years and then were eligible to practice in the rural areas right so you
[Guest]: have to start thinking creatively about expanding the supply in a way that the
[Guest]: most important mistake let me repeat again and again and this is true with
[Guest]: all of our public sector recruitment okay and that's because we recruit on
[Guest]: the basis of a test and the basis of knowledge the people who will get this
[Guest]: pass the exam will almost invariably be from urban areas and even like those who
[Guest]: get in from other areas the salaries will be so high that their aspirations
[Guest]: will be urban so a big part of the absence problem is not that people are
[Guest]: bad is that they're just completely disconnected from the communities they
[Guest]: are serving right so to kind of take what we've learned from the ASHA model
[Guest]: to say take local talent that is connected to the community and invest
[Guest]: in upskilling them in a way that there's a pipeline from the skilling to the
[Guest]: employment I think is one of the most important structural points like you
[Guest]: know we need to do in terms of building our healthcare capacity again these are
[Guest]: more complex kind of reforms now the other thing that is immediately
[Guest]: actionable for a government okay given that at the end of the day governments
[Guest]: they know how to build things okay they know how to kind of just you know do
[Guest]: more of the same okay what the one thing I would say which Abhijit Banerjee is
[Guest]: also written about is particularly in UP, Bihar and places where the population
[Guest]: has grown so much over the past kind of 20-30 years that there is a strong case
[Guest]: for building a second district hospital right because right now you have one
[Guest]: district hospital but there's been this in the 70s and the population has
[Guest]: doubled okay now the nice thing about a district hospital is you have scale and
[Guest]: when you have scale you can have kind of the community of practice the absence is
[Guest]: typically much much lower in these district hospitals compared to the
[Guest]: remote rural areas the utilization is higher and it also becomes possible to
[Guest]: then do my third idea which is kind of attach medical colleges right because
[Guest]: the medical education problem so I'll come back to that right so the second
[Guest]: thing is build district hospitals this is something the government knows how to
[Guest]: do like you know I mean just do it build a second district hospital in kind of
[Guest]: the second nodal area and given the investment in roads and people's
[Guest]: willingness to travel that's a case where concentrating your resources in a
[Guest]: scale facility makes more sense than saying I'm going to build these itsy
[Guest]: bitsy little PHCs that nobody goes to okay so that's the second point the
[Guest]: third then coming to medical education itself and if you go back to the two
[Guest]: India's paper I think one of the big reasons for why you see this massive
[Guest]: gradient in health care quality is the substantial investment in medical
[Guest]: education I mean in the southern states now some of this is driven by private
[Guest]: investment which reflects the fact that it's expensive and the southern states
[Guest]: are richer and so people are just able to pay more okay but from a policy
[Guest]: perspective medical education is controlled pretty much by the government
[Guest]: now of course there's a ton of rent-seeking there and like you know and
[Guest]: that's been you know the tragedy but hopefully this is a crisis where the
[Guest]: chief minister says k boss I'm not going to allow rent-seeking here because this
[Guest]: is now really important and then the three things that determine kind of your
[Guest]: medical education capacities you know there's the facilities there is the you
[Guest]: know there's the actual human capital right mean the you know who are the
[Guest]: people available to do the training and typically these have been attached to
[Guest]: district hospitals partly because that's where you have the doctors available so
[Guest]: yeah so I think on the public system those would be kind of the three things
[Guest]: I would do as far as health care is concerned now there is obviously the
[Guest]: technology piece of this and there is a question about does the public system
[Guest]: have the dexterity and the speed to kind of really leverage technology the way
[Guest]: you want to at scale so I think one thing which I haven't discussed in the
[Guest]: book but just like I had done in the case of charter schools in the private
[Guest]: school there may well be a case to kind of partner with public spirited
[Guest]: foundations to come and say that if you were to kind of take over a management
[Guest]: contract okay for running a public health system in one district right so
[Guest]: it would still be public in the sense that you wouldn't turn away patients you
[Guest]: wouldn't charge fees but you would basically bring in a publicly motivated
[Guest]: person to come and look at their technology and innovation landscape and
[Guest]: saying how would I re-architect the system with modern principles of
[Guest]: technology and private sector right so and I don't think we've done enough of
[Guest]: that I think we've done PPP's in terms of outsourcing tertiary care and
[Guest]: saying in Ayushman Bharat or Arogya Shree that we will reimburse private
[Guest]: hospitals what we have not done enough of is saying can I bring real private
[Guest]: sector management expertise and horsepower into re-engineering the
[Guest]: public system to leverage technology and do things at scale right so I think that
[Amit Varma]: might be something else that's really really worth thinking about. So many
[Amit Varma]: things to unpack there but I won't unpack too many of them because you've
[Amit Varma]: been so sort of clear and concise but I will point out that one thing that
[Amit Varma]: delighted me was that I asked Ajay a question in the last episode about
[Amit Varma]: philanthropist and hundred million and you picked up on it in this episode and
[Amit Varma]: answered it without my asking it which is which I find delightful which is you
[Amit Varma]: know that's how I like to see the scene in the unseen a conversation that goes
[Amit Varma]: across time and across episode and across guests so I wonder what question
[Amit Varma]: that I asked you will be answered by some other guest who knows maybe we
[Amit Varma]: could have an answer next week. I also want to quote a little bit from your
[Amit Varma]: two India's paper because just for the listeners to clarify that there's a lot
[Amit Varma]: of activity happening at the local level which isn't exactly the same that the
[Amit Varma]: state also is not a monolithic beast just as individuals aren't. So you speak
[Amit Varma]: about the different views of primary health care and you say quote one view
[Amit Varma]: of primary care in rural India is that it is available mainly through publicly
[Amit Varma]: operated private health care centers or sub centers which are sparsely located
[Amit Varma]: and understaffed. According to this view qualified doctors in India are mostly
[Amit Varma]: located in urban locations and access to quality care in India is poor. Stop
[Amit Varma]: quote and the other view is quote an alternate view agrees that even though
[Amit Varma]: access to qualified providers in rural India is low a wide variety of health
[Amit Varma]: care providers with diverse qualifications has arisen to fill this
[Amit Varma]: gap stop quote and where what I found interesting was how you detailed out how
[Amit Varma]: different states are treating this differently this situation in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that you know West Bengal is trying to train them Chhattisgarh like you said is
[Amit Varma]: reducing requirements making it modular and saying okay you don't have to do all
[Amit Varma]: six years you can just do three years or whatever you talk about how UP and MP
[Amit Varma]: are increasing transportation so that's how your access goes up you don't need a
[Amit Varma]: doctor there immediately and how the government of India is allowing
[Amit Varma]: alternate medicine docs and wellness centers and I love this quote that you
[Amit Varma]: know you quoted the Indian Medical Association which is resisting this
[Amit Varma]: obviously because it you know they want to keep it supply as restricted as
[Amit Varma]: possible and you've written quote in their view for instance training
[Amit Varma]: informal sector providers is like teaching burglars to steal better I love
[Amit Varma]: that good teaching burglars to steal better isn't this what the IAS Academy
[Amit Varma]: in Missouri does but never mind this is my distrust of the dysfunctional state
[Amit Varma]: has also become a kind of for me my guess of sorts you know there's lots to
[Amit Varma]: think about and once again what I will say from having read these papers and
[Amit Varma]: having read the chapter in your book but even the papers itself even your to
[Amit Varma]: India's paper is that there's a lot of depth and nuance there and so I would
[Amit Varma]: just encourage listeners to get into the weeds because this is a problem I think
[Amit Varma]: that is not just a problem for academics and policymakers it concerns all of us
[Amit Varma]: we've seen that in this specific season all our lives are affected the quality
[Amit Varma]: of our lives and sometimes our very lives themselves so do check out those
[Amit Varma]: papers and go a little bit into the weeds it's it's worth it there are a lot
[Amit Varma]: of insights there for me let me turn your attention now to the current crisis
[Amit Varma]: to COVID and of course I have done many episodes on this and there are just like
[Amit Varma]: so many aspects of this to talk about but I have spoken about the economics
[Amit Varma]: aspects of this a policymaking aspects of this you know all the different
[Guest]: before COVID because I had finished the public part of the policy I maybe I'll
[Unknown]: take five minutes to talk about the private part of policy let's go let's
[Unknown]: come back yeah because I think that and again see in many ways the the episodes
[Guest]: that I'm doing in education and health are kind of mirroring the structure of
[Guest]: the book in the sense that the book has these six thematic chapters and the
[Guest]: themes then cut across six different sectors so in that way you'll see the
[Guest]: parallels that are happening here and one of the most important kind of points
[Guest]: I want to make is and this is to any health minister or health secretary
[Guest]: anywhere who may be listening to this at some point is that the biggest kind of I
[Guest]: would say myopia we have in health policy is that the government for the
[Guest]: most part only thinks about its job is running the public system okay whereas
[Guest]: we need the clarity again that the government plays three different very
[Guest]: different roles in the ecosystem right as a policymaker as a regulator and as a
[Guest]: provider and the way you see the private sector is very different in these three
[Guest]: lenses right so as a policymaker the private sector is your ally because your
[Guest]: job is to improve outcomes for everybody regardless of who provides it as a
[Guest]: regulator the private sector is equal to the public because you want to treat
[Guest]: them equally and as a provider they are your competitor okay now the problem is
[Guest]: that the government the majority of its staff and human resources are thinking
[Guest]: and functioning as government as provider right and so which means you
[Guest]: automatically distrust the private sector you automatically want to kind of
[Guest]: cramp them in multiple ways and you know and sometimes justify because of course
[Guest]: these are profit you know for every good private guy there's a equally bad
[Guest]: private guy so and the policymaking by anecdote me you can do whatever you want
[Guest]: right because you can find you can find any story to justify what you want to do
[Guest]: okay so but coming back to the stark reality that 75% of health care in this
[Guest]: country is delivered by the private sector okay if you are a thinking health
[Guest]: minister or health secretary tomorrow who says that I care about improving my
[Guest]: health systems the elephant in the room are these private guys okay so what are
[Guest]: you going to do about them okay now yeah so the default approach to the private
[Guest]: sector is basically to pretend that they don't exist okay because they're illegal
[Guest]: they're not supposed to be practicing and every once in a while you'll have
[Guest]: these drives of going and shutting down these clinics okay but the problem is
[Guest]: they will come back a week later or two weeks later because they're in the
[Guest]: community they are highly respected they are the only source of care and so there
[Guest]: is demand right I mean so you know and I think the denial we are in is really
[Guest]: really counterproductive given that if we care about population health the
[Guest]: largest segment are these folks okay so what would I do and this is where again
[Guest]: we have evidence okay so there's this lovely paper again by Jishnu and and
[Guest]: Abhijit Banerjee and co-authors in Bengal right I mean where they partnered
[Guest]: with the liver foundation and they ran this program again it was a randomized
[Guest]: control trial of basically training these unqualified providers okay so they
[Guest]: ran a modular training over about a nine-month period and the whole point
[Guest]: was to say listen you know you are in the community you care about doing well
[Guest]: so can we give you some basic training and just does that make you better okay
[Guest]: and what they found was that this modest training had a substantial positive
[Guest]: impact right on their effectiveness as measured by standardized patients and it
[Guest]: almost halved the gap between the completely unqualified and the fully
[Guest]: qualified in about nine months of training okay so coming back therefore
[Guest]: to this core point that I made that quality is a function of knowledge and
[Guest]: effort right public sector has high knowledge low effort private sector has
[Guest]: low knowledge high effort okay so if you do a simple partial derivative I'll ask
[Guest]: your audience to do in their heads right the partial derivative of quality with
[Guest]: respect to effort is knowledge right and vice versa so which means the returns to
[Guest]: knowledge is actually higher in the private sector because the effort is
[Guest]: high whereas the returns effort is higher in the public sector because the
[Guest]: knowledge is high right so if you want to think about system architecture we
[Guest]: need to be thinking about how do you improve the incentives and
[Guest]: accountability in the public sector and how do you improve the knowledge in the
[Guest]: private sector whereas in practice we do exactly the opposite right I mean because
[Guest]: we say the private guys we ignore them and we keep doing trainings of various
[Guest]: sorts right I can mean in the public sector okay so now of course this is
[Guest]: politically fraught right because it will obviously be like opposed by
[Guest]: different kind of interest groups and so it's very important to be very clear
[Guest]: that then I'm not talking about training these guys and calling them doctors okay
[Guest]: like I mean it is going back to the spirit of modular training recognizing
[Guest]: that listen these guys are in the community they are respected they don't
[Guest]: want to do bad right I mean the last thing they want is to hurt their
[Guest]: patients because they're living in the community correct so giving them the
[Guest]: ability to kind of be better and be able to refer complex cases almost says that
[Guest]: listen you these private guys exist anyway okay so why not leverage them to
[Guest]: be like the first point of kind of a structure of care whereby I train them
[Guest]: to say okay don't do this don't do this don't do this and now here are things
[Guest]: that you can do now there is a question about what credential you give them like
[Guest]: you know maybe you create a cadre of paramedics or a cadre of like you know
[Guest]: something that provides a certain legitimacy but doesn't say like you know
[Guest]: that but then you say if you call yourself doctor like you know then I'll
[Guest]: penalize you so again I can just give you principles right now the details of
[Guest]: this will then have to be worked out in specific states specific context now one
[Guest]: way to hybridize the two ideas I talked about was to say suppose we have a
[Guest]: modular training program for nurses or we have this RMA training program okay
[Guest]: whereby say we are going to create these two-year programs or diplomas for these
[Guest]: rural medical assistants then in terms of who gets admission into that program
[Guest]: one route could be to say you do well in a 12th standard exam the other route
[Guest]: could be that if you are one of these unqualified but registered medical
[Guest]: practitioners who's been in your community for 10 years that maybe will
[Guest]: give you some preferential access into this two-year training program okay so
[Guest]: that we are able to take that informal workforce and start giving them some
[Guest]: formal skills okay so that would be one piece of how you may take this private
[Guest]: system and make it function better okay in a way that is constructive as opposed
[Guest]: to saying I'm going to play whack-a-mole with you and shut you down shut you down
[Guest]: but then you'll pop up in another place okay so that's one idea then I think the
[Guest]: other things in the private sector you know one is obviously I think something
[Guest]: Ajay alluded to you see the biggest challenge in designing health care
[Guest]: systems is at one level you want some incentives for good care at another
[Guest]: level you don't want the incentives to be too strong for over medication right
[Guest]: so so structurally one way to do this is if you have insurance companies that are
[Guest]: essentially signing agreements with providers okay and saying that you are
[Guest]: my designated provider now what happens is the members of the policy at the
[Guest]: beginning of every year have a chance to choose their provider but the good news
[Guest]: is you're now choosing not when you are sick and need to be hospitalized when
[Guest]: you have very little bargaining power and very little time you are choosing at
[Guest]: a time when you have kind of the ability to think about a year away so the
[Guest]: practice then has an incentive to have a reputation for providing a certain
[Guest]: standard of care because if you are somebody who's seen as crimping then
[Guest]: people will not choose you but the way you compensate the practice is not by
[Guest]: saying I'm gonna pay you for procedure you say I pay you a certain amount for
[Guest]: every patient you enroll in the course of a year so that you are not
[Guest]: incentivized to overtreat right so again if you think about say the British
[Guest]: National Health System the NHS has a similar so as a doctor as a primary care
[Guest]: practitioner you get paid a certain piece rate for every patient who signs
[Guest]: up with your practice but then your reimbursements are relatively flat right
[Guest]: so you don't get a steep gradient for doing too many procedures so again going
[Guest]: back to what I just said these are incredibly complex issues and you know
[Guest]: Western countries have entire communities of health economists like
[Guest]: who are you know working with common data sets and starting to these are
[Guest]: incredibly deep complex design detail questions right but the broad
[Guest]: architecture would take that form that you say you one of the ways to solve
[Guest]: this asymmetry problem is you put a kind of a bigger buyer on the other side and
[Guest]: over time you create the right incentives for the overall ecosystem and
[Guest]: the last thing I would do going back to ideas for your hypothetical
[Guest]: philanthropist with hundred million dollars like you know I mean is that
[Guest]: there are a lot of light touch investments we can make that allow
[Guest]: markets to function better okay I mean even without being directly in the
[Guest]: business of provision or insurance or reimbursement okay so part of the
[Guest]: problem today is we have no transparent source of data on who the providers are
[Guest]: so if you're sitting in your city you have no idea who's practicing around you
[Guest]: right I mean and so now there are companies obviously information is
[Guest]: valuable right so there are companies that have tried to set up a business say
[Guest]: I think in education I was looking for some schools and then you get these
[Guest]: private companies that say school ratings but then the revenue model for
[Guest]: them is either the school or the hospital is paying to get rated and then
[Guest]: you have the agency problem that you had with say credit ratings or the user is
[Guest]: paying to access that which means it is restricted in the user base and as
[Guest]: information is fundamentally a public good so as in public good in the sense
[Guest]: that once you've created it the marginal cost of spreading it is zero right so if
[Guest]: a government won't do this which they should but don't have the capacity of
[Guest]: the money to do one incredibly leveraged thing philanthropy can do is just come
[Guest]: and create kind of open source information platforms like I mean that
[Guest]: allows you to just crowdsource over time think who are all the providers in a
[Guest]: given market right I mean now and then over time you could have like a small
[Guest]: cadre of dedicated staff who will then go and do field verification of each of
[Guest]: these guys right like I mean so make it a positive revelation game for people to
[Guest]: want to be listed in the portal as somebody who's providing services with a
[Guest]: certain level of kind of qualifications or basic details of what their practice
[Guest]: is but I think we underestimate the value of just good information okay so
[Guest]: Jishnu has a series of very nice papers in Pakistan looking at information on
[Guest]: school quality right I mean and what they find is just providing better
[Guest]: information on school quality without any additional money right leads to huge
[Guest]: downstream positive impacts over time because it just you know it makes the
[Guest]: market much more transparent and it forces you to react to kind of what is
[Guest]: possible and what you see in the market so let me stop there I mean I have even
[Guest]: more ideas but I think these are enough to kind of I think you know clarifying
[Guest]: some of these conceptual issues and hopefully providing some direction of
[Amit Varma]: where we need to go. These are stimulating ideas and I hope young
[Amit Varma]: entrepreneurs listening to this can take inspiration from this I mean why do you
[Amit Varma]: need a philanthropist necessarily throwing a hundred million dollars or a or the evil
[Amit Varma]: dysfunctional state coming in and say yeah we can do it we'll show Amit that
[Amit Varma]: we can also do some work you know where is a private enterprise you know there
[Amit Varma]: are so many areas to fix here these are the problems worth solving so kindly
[Amit Varma]: come in and try that is my message to all young entrepreneurs listening to
[Amit Varma]: this you are giving messages to health minister through my show boss what are
[Amit Varma]: you even thinking you know right but never mind you know maybe maybe the
[Amit Varma]: person who will be health minister of India in 2035 is listening to this now
[Amit Varma]: so kindly I hope your attention is good let's talk about the podcast will still
[Guest]: be available I think you know I mean one of the things I think you mentioned in
[Guest]: your chat with Milan Vaishnav I think after the first episode with Pratap is
[Guest]: that you know the point in some ways yes I think it makes sense to discuss health
[Guest]: right now when we're in the COVID moment but it's almost more effective I think
[Guest]: rather than making prognosis in the fog of war to kind of focus on the first
[Guest]: principles of just the largest structure and these things will then you know play
[Amit Varma]: through regardless yeah like my my conceit was that I am making episodes
[Amit Varma]: for 30 years later so I don't want to go across space I won't also want to go
[Amit Varma]: across time and of course it is possible one reason I came up with that
[Amit Varma]: highfalutin idea was because I thought no one will listen to me in the present
[Amit Varma]: time but clearly that is not the case people listen I think the idea to create
[Amit Varma]: timeless content is great and that's also why it's it's so wonderful that
[Amit Varma]: you've come on the show twice because I think both of these episodes education
[Amit Varma]: and healthcare are almost so useful in terms of providing foundational
[Amit Varma]: understanding while we aim for the timeless we also have to address the
[Amit Varma]: times so let's let's kind of get to COVID now on COVID I've done episodes
[Amit Varma]: with economists of various types I've done you know episodes on it with
[Amit Varma]: relief workers who are out there feeding people with data journalists with
[Amit Varma]: epidemiologists with scientists who are you know good at describing what the
[Amit Varma]: virus is but even though you don't call yourself a healthcare economist you
[Amit Varma]: you're probably the closest to that definition with whom I guess Ajay also
[Amit Varma]: to a fair extent because you're both economists interested in who have looked
[Amit Varma]: deeply into healthcare so what's what's your sense like what could we have done
[Amit Varma]: differently which is not obvious in hindsight yes I think I don't want to do
[Guest]: Monday morning quarterbacking because I think while there is a space for
[Guest]: accountability in our public discourse I think the problem when you kind of
[Guest]: and that's important right this is not to say that there shouldn't be
[Guest]: accountability for people who were asleep at the wheel but when in this
[Guest]: moment right mean when you go down that road you essentially create
[Guest]: defensiveness right like I mean and so I would like to kind of unapologetically
[Guest]: focus on what do we do today and going forward right I mean what has happened
[Guest]: has happened right so I think they're really just three points right mean
[Guest]: which is the last year we thought about ventilators this year we are focusing on
[Guest]: oxygen okay like I mean which is visceral because you see people dying
[Guest]: and you kind of immediately see that I need to get oxygen that's important
[Guest]: right but I think the most important message again is what is the public
[Guest]: health and what are the things that the government should be doing that and
[Guest]: again optimizing the cost see one of I remember reading somewhere right that in
[Guest]: in a war any decision you make is going to have some casualties okay because
[Guest]: there are only bad choices right so the point of leadership in a fog of war is
[Guest]: to assess the risks and kind of be able to take a reasonable decision that is
[Guest]: informed by the best information available with a certain amount of
[Guest]: transparency so that the public continues to have confidence in the
[Guest]: leadership right mean and I think that is something which I will definitely say
[Guest]: has been lacking and consistency of communication and transparency to the
[Guest]: public about where we are and where we are going I think is incredibly
[Guest]: important so that being said I would really just say three things okay so
[Guest]: there is obviously a piece of what we need to do that is just on the sheer
[Guest]: logistics of hospital beds or oxygen and stuff like that and even there I think
[Guest]: the important things are not so much getting somebody oxygen Twitter like you
[Guest]: said because like I was saying that means somebody else is not getting it
[Guest]: it's really intervening to reduce the frictions right is there excess oxygen
[Guest]: somewhere and somebody needing it somewhere else is that oxygen going to
[Guest]: places where there is no trained operator to use it right so we need kind
[Guest]: of mindful interventions because there's complementarities across these different
[Guest]: pieces and so that I think is important but I would say the single most
[Guest]: important thing we need to do see the end game is vaccines okay there's no
[Guest]: question but the vaccines are going to take a minimum of six to nine months to
[Guest]: roll out across the population okay so what do we have evidence on today is the
[Guest]: one thing that the country should just be doing in a war footing is masking
[Guest]: okay because we know a lot more about this disease in the past year we spent a
[Guest]: lot of time cleaning surfaces we spent a lot of time doing other things what we
[Guest]: now know is that the vast majority of transmission is airborne this is
[Guest]: fundamentally an airborne disease and it is completely you know unglamorous
[Guest]: simple but it works okay and so the surgical masks they just work now and
[Guest]: again this is a case where unfortunately I think the public messaging was a
[Guest]: little mixed in the beginning because WHO in the beginning said masks are not
[Guest]: needed but that's because they were trying to save masks for the health care
[Guest]: workers so that was a case where I think the communication was actually wrong
[Guest]: because it gave the sense it was not needed it is unambiguously clear that
[Guest]: you need the masks that they work okay and we now have the supply elasticity of
[Guest]: that is basically infinite you can get those masks at scale okay so what we
[Guest]: need is just a very simple public communication to the nation and maybe by
[Guest]: chief ministers if not at the national level to just say the following three
[Guest]: things right which is saying that the lockdown is an incredibly costly last
[Guest]: option the big cities are doing this because we have no choice for two weeks
[Guest]: but the end game is going to come when everybody's vaccinated and between now
[Guest]: and everybody being vaccinated we need everybody to essentially take the
[Guest]: masking seriously I would say the government should spend the money it
[Guest]: takes to procure masks like you know so my contemporary Mushfiq Mubarak who's
[Guest]: basically my batchmate was a professor of economics at Yale from Bangladesh in
[Guest]: the past one year he has put together a consortium of kind of engineers medical
[Guest]: experts from Stanford across universities and they've really been
[Guest]: doing a lot of research on masking and both in terms of you know what is the
[Guest]: most effective type of mask right you know the surgical mask what kind of
[Guest]: filters and they've been doing a lot of work on testing different models of
[Guest]: behavior change communication so they've done randomized control trials now in
[Guest]: Bangladesh with different villages doing different models and they now have
[Guest]: enough results from this I think that paper will be forthcoming in science
[Guest]: soon and they've done a series of kind of webinars I think in India but the
[Guest]: steps are very very clear right literally go door-to-door in every
[Guest]: village right mean procure four masks per family like give them the mask and
[Guest]: now why does the giving the mask matter it matters because not only are you
[Guest]: signaling to every citizen that this is important that the government is doing
[Guest]: this but you are also making it common knowledge that everybody has gotten the
[Guest]: mask okay so it's no longer acceptable to be around without the mask because
[Guest]: you know the government has come and hand-delivered this at your door right
[Guest]: so they have procured a washable mask and so this is washable but a set of
[Guest]: four means you wear a different one like every week you wash them and wear that
[Guest]: then there is this piece about you need an all-of-government approach on this
[Guest]: that it's not just the health workers but it's the gram you know it's the
[Guest]: panchayat and in a way the rural areas are even more important right because
[Guest]: the health care infrastructure in the urban areas at least you can do
[Guest]: something about in the rural areas you don't even have the health
[Guest]: infrastructure so prevention is your only game in town okay so you need an
[Guest]: all-hands-on-government approach saying between the health workers, the ASHA
[Guest]: workers, the Anganwadi workers, the ANMs, the village sarpanch, all of the ward
[Guest]: members, the panchayati raj officials all hands on deck right I mean this is an
[Guest]: all-of-government approach to saying you're going to get you the masks and
[Guest]: this is going to happen get the communication going in a standardized
[Guest]: way use your film stars use your cricketers use whatever to just kind of
[Guest]: reinforce again and again and again that there's the basics of the disease right
[Guest]: and sometimes repetition is good that have the simple graph that says this is
[Guest]: fundamentally airborne so you know we obviously the epidemiologists need to
[Guest]: worry a lot about variants and sequencing and what is happening but for
[Guest]: the arm janta that is irrelevant right what is relevant is that this is an
[Guest]: airborne disease and the way you kind of contain spread is making universal
[Guest]: masking till everybody's vaccinated that's it and a simple way of saying
[Guest]: this you know one thing I feel strongly about is that the 35,000 crore cost of
[Guest]: universal vaccination I mean it's rounding error right like I mean
[Guest]: compared to the cost of the disease of the cost of a lockdown I think of a
[Guest]: nationwide lockdown costs about 200,000 crores a week okay and if vaccinating
[Guest]: everybody cost 35,000 crores like you know you should just write a check from
[Guest]: the government of India not even ask a question and just get it done right so
[Guest]: similarly at a state level if it's I think our estimate and the masking right
[Guest]: now is that it'll cost maybe 50 200 crores like you know to do the
[Guest]: procurement and just get this done but the cost of a lockdown in an average
[Guest]: size Indian state is about 2,000 crores a week right I mean so or sorry 2,000
[Guest]: crores a day about somewhere between thousand 2,000 crores depending on the
[Guest]: intensity of lockout so and this is essentially I feel so strongly about
[Guest]: this because this is the core point of public health versus curative health
[Guest]: right which we've talked about throughout this class so sorry I almost
[Amit Varma]: feel like I have made it a class. I am perfectly happy to be a student in your class no issues
[Amit Varma]: we are all me and all my listeners we are the biggest class you ever had
[Guest]: probably this is true this is true but no I think you know but this is why I
[Guest]: think it's useful to understand the first principles and then all be able to
[Guest]: apply those first principles to the problem at hand right the first
[Guest]: principles is the ROI and spending on public health dwarfs like you know so
[Guest]: tomorrow now we are already talking about needing to do cash transfers to
[Guest]: kind of alleviate the suffering from job loss absolutely that's correct but that
[Guest]: palliative measure is going to cost you already 10 times 15 times 20 times what
[Guest]: it will cost you to do universal accelerate vaccinations in every
[Guest]: possible way and get the universal masking going for the next six to nine
[Guest]: months right I mean so and think about it this way if there was an enemy at the
[Guest]: border during wars I remember my grandfather like you know my mother
[Guest]: remembers growing up in Agartala in 1971 like you know during the that 71 war
[Guest]: and yeah there would be these sirens there would be blackouts like you know
[Guest]: when there's kind of enemy air sorties coming and everybody every single person
[Guest]: would turn their lights off right because you knew that one light on was
[Guest]: kind of enough to give the whole game away right I mean and so you know but if
[Guest]: you look at the statistics pandemics kill like we've lost more people in that
[Guest]: the 1918 to 1920 kind of you know Spanish flu in India then ten times more
[Guest]: than World War one and World War two put together right like I mean so why are we
[Guest]: not treating it with that level of urgency where the only contribution we
[Guest]: are asking every citizen to do is wear that mask and wear it at every single
[Guest]: point when you're outside avoid the large gatherings and the government can
[Guest]: kind of help and accelerate this by procuring and don't stop don't do
[Guest]: distributing for masks to every family and just make it happen right I mean so
[Guest]: that's the one thing which I feel very confident about saying that we just
[Guest]: simply have to do I won't get into you know politics of vaccine pricing and
[Guest]: procurement and all of that I think I just talked about that but you know I
[Guest]: would just say regardless of what formula we use government of India state
[Guest]: governments like you know just spend the money it takes to get the vaccines done
[Guest]: and kind of don't try to nickel and dime and get poor patients to pay like
[Guest]: five hundred thousand rupees like you know it's kind of completely completely
[Amit Varma]: foolhardy so you mentioned the term there which kind of triggered a memory
[Amit Varma]: of a recent news headline which is you said panchayat and I thought of how in
[Amit Varma]: UP these 700 teachers died because they were sent on panchayat duty because the
[Amit Varma]: UP government refused to you know postpone the elections they send these
[Amit Varma]: teachers on government duty they died in fact a recent report from May 6 says
[Amit Varma]: it's more than a thousand by now the death toll and there was a story of a
[Amit Varma]: woman who you know her husband couldn't go because he was literally on his death
[Amit Varma]: bed he ended up dying I think and she was asked by the government that why is
[Amit Varma]: your husband not coming for duty and she had to send a photograph of him on his
[Amit Varma]: hospital bed as proof something of that sort and that and to me that's murder by
[Amit Varma]: the way plain and simple murder by the state and that kind of leads me to the
[Amit Varma]: thought that of course I agree with you we should do universal masking but what
[Amit Varma]: we're really talking about here is two things information and messaging that
[Amit Varma]: this is a correct information we should get out there but this is messaging we
[Amit Varma]: should be done in the public interest what we instead see the kind of
[Amit Varma]: messaging that we see is actually spreading the wrong kind of information
[Amit Varma]: like coronil is good for you you know that ayurvedic thing and that will cure
[Amit Varma]: you or there will be a godman who will say that there's no problem with oxygen
[Amit Varma]: you just need to learn how to breathe right and you need to do these yoga
[Amit Varma]: poses and all that and for once I'm moving away by the way you will note
[Amit Varma]: from criticizing the state to criticizing society itself because our
[Amit Varma]: society honestly we elites in the first class of this plane and all that we
[Amit Varma]: might think that we read books we read papers in your case you write papers and
[Amit Varma]: we are all okay but we are a very backward country look at the things we
[Amit Varma]: believe it seems to me to be an insurmountable challenge at two levels
[Amit Varma]: and I don't mean to be negative and say that we shouldn't try at all and you
[Guest]: know and so in fact I had not intended to talk about say Indian systems of
[Guest]: health care or like you know alternative systems of health care but let me say I
[Guest]: think one important point here right which is see I think if you read Sanjay
[Guest]: Bharu's recent book see a big part of the current dispensation in government
[Guest]: is something that reflects this deep sense of angst that the greatness of
[Guest]: Indian history right mean and traditions and cultures like you know are being
[Guest]: undervalued by kind of you know modernity and I think some of this is
[Guest]: language right mean that the English-speaking class has been you know
[Guest]: we have been incredibly remiss I think in kind of not getting scientific
[Guest]: content right mean out in local languages in a way that it's kind of
[Guest]: much more accessible so you know there's and in fact when I started writing my
[Guest]: column in HT one of the reasons I picked HT was I spent a lot of time trying to
[Guest]: translate and write in Hindi like I mean in Hindustan but it turned out too
[Guest]: technical and like I think they told me Kinneboss you'll have to simplify this
[Guest]: but that's a separate story but but at least the intent was there okay but the
[Guest]: but no but I think here's the point I want to make is that see modern clinical
[Guest]: trials okay so I do RCTs for a living I believe in RCTs and it came from
[Guest]: medicine okay but that being said there is one big blind spot right which is
[Guest]: conditional on doing a particular study we randomize the treatment and saying
[Guest]: did this treatment have an effect okay but the universe of treatments that get
[Guest]: evaluated by RCTs is highly selective right you know so what determines what
[Guest]: gets evaluated correct so now to me the right way of kind of bridging I would
[Guest]: say the tradition and the strength we have in our traditional system see here
[Guest]: is my view of our traditional systems is that a lot of it may be quackery a lot
[Guest]: of it may be placebo but just by natural selection okay the fact that something
[Guest]: has survived for three thousand four thousand five thousand years means that
[Guest]: there is likely to be some survivorship bias okay that if people say take ginger
[Guest]: or take turmeric or take honey right like you know that is not kind of
[Guest]: pharmaceutically done but that has a bunch of so my throat after talking for
[Guest]: us what am I drinking I'm just drinking honey water like you know with herbal
[Guest]: tea right so but where I think we need to really be thoughtful about bridging
[Guest]: kind of the greatness of our traditions with the modern scientific standards is
[Guest]: to say instead of claiming that we had all of these great things in plastic
[Guest]: surgery in the back days I can always say here is a body of traditional
[Guest]: knowledge that we can now invest in testing like you know with more modern
[Guest]: scientific methods and then validate rather than waiting for Western
[Guest]: pharmaceutical companies to come and patent like name and like you know I
[Guest]: mean it's a good right like you know all these kind of things that we've been
[Guest]: doing traditionally you know so in that way we've known it works so why leave it
[Guest]: to the Westerners to come and bring modern science to our traditions as
[Guest]: opposed to kind of taking the traditions and meeting the science and kind of
[Guest]: getting the best of both worlds and the Chinese have been very good at this I
[Guest]: forget the name of the scientist but somebody who won a Nobel Prize like you
[Guest]: know I mean for medicine actually did exactly this right mean take a bunch of
[Guest]: traditional medicine but then validate and some of these will not be true okay
[Guest]: the whole point of kind of the modern RCTs is some of these will in fact have
[Guest]: been placebos of folk wisdom but some of them will turn out to be very effective
[Guest]: I share your despair at kind of pop science like you know and the marketing
[Guest]: around it but I think it's important to recognize the source of cultural angst
[Guest]: right I mean of where it comes from and then find a constructive way to channel
[Guest]: that angst in a way that reflects a modern scientific temperament yeah I
[Amit Varma]: mean I look I have nothing but respect for the conservative view that if
[Amit Varma]: something has worked over the centuries I mean there's a reason it's a
[Amit Varma]: survivorship bias you know putting haldi in doodh when you're ill and all that
[Amit Varma]: it's fine I'm cool with that I have an issue with things like this coronel
[Amit Varma]: stuff or you know a yogic pose will solve your oxygen problem which to me is
[Amit Varma]: just offensive to the people who actually suffer from it I have a problem
[Amit Varma]: with those but that's a separate issue I mean two of the major problems that I
[Amit Varma]: have with you know our modern times have been expressed by us in this episode
[Amit Varma]: which is the incentives problem and the narratives problem and neither of those
[Amit Varma]: is going to go away anytime soon so but before I let you go let's turn away from
[Amit Varma]: healthcare for a moment what have you been reading recently outside of work
[Amit Varma]: let's say what are the last three books which filled you with joy we all which
[Amit Varma]: you thoroughly enjoyed which you can recommend to me and my listeners except
[Amit Varma]: that you know kindly don't put some random academic thing and say no no I
[Amit Varma]: got joy from this and all that no no outside of that so here's the bad news
[Guest]: and the good news okay so the the bad news is I have not actually done much
[Guest]: reading in the past year year and a half because I've mainly been reading things
[Guest]: around my book the good news is that my main source of new knowledge has been
[Guest]: listening to podcasts including yours right like you know I mean and so one of
[Guest]: my routines here in this pandemic and again San Diego it's interesting you
[Guest]: mentioned Eric Topol right because he's here in San Diego and San Diego is just
[Guest]: like a magical place to be in in some ways right because you can just go out
[Guest]: in long walks and so yeah my source of absorbing new knowledge in the pandemic
[Guest]: has actually been primarily audio and podcasts okay so yeah so somebody else
[Guest]: would ask me I would say go listen to a bunch of seen and unseen episodes and
[Guest]: I'm not saying this to flatter you because I had not done it in 180 at the
[Guest]: time I did the first one but I have done as you can see from the connections I'm
[Amit Varma]: making okay what are your favorite episode shallow what are your favorite
[Guest]: episodes I mean obviously the one with Pratap was a classic like you know I
[Guest]: mean that happened like you know immediately immediately after mine you
[Guest]: know I enjoyed the one with Vinay Sitapati a lot though I mean I did think
[Guest]: it kind of I would say whitewashed a little bit like you mean of kind of the
[Guest]: larger narrative like you know of the rise of the RSS but I think overall I
[Guest]: really enjoyed hearing the bit about the combination of legal journalistic and
[Guest]: scholarly training in that book right and so I I can see the lack of the
[Guest]: journalistic training in my own writing like you know because I'll do the fact
[Guest]: checking in the same rigor as an academic but I haven't learned the craft
[Guest]: of storytelling in my writing nearly as much right so that piece is a lot more
[Guest]: work for me because you know I get the content right but then I have to
[Guest]: simplify which is why I'm still saying I might do four podcasts and say
[Amit Varma]: book chhodo yaar. You're most welcome to write a book but you're also welcome as a
[Amit Varma]: supplementary effort a supplementary teacher training you can say but I
[Guest]: enjoyed that in terms of the process of writing I've enjoyed like your recent
[Guest]: scientific ones like you know with again I keep calling him bhalo manush but
[Unknown]: Anirban right you know I think that was I think that was fun I think you know
[Guest]: just going back in or Gautam like you know hearing people talk about the joy
[Guest]: of science and I mean I'm a nerd I'm an academic at heart so yeah as a way of
[Guest]: kind of learning you know people who have been at the cutting edge of other
[Guest]: disciplines talking about their work I think that's the part I've really
[Amit Varma]: enjoyed. Well I think many many many listeners of the seen and the unseen
[Amit Varma]: would actually say that you are one of their favorite guests so once again
[Amit Varma]: thank you so much for coming on the show and I hope our conversation keeps
[Amit Varma]: continuing over the months and and good luck with your book and yeah take good
[Amit Varma]: care of yourself as Amitabh Bachchan says on KBC and take good care of yourself
[Amit Varma]: what else does he say that Shabba Khair line?
[Guest]: Haan matlab gaana toh hai meriyaar Shabba Khair like you know
[Amit Varma]: dinisara mizara tohre angana which is like where I know the line from
[Amit Varma]: No at the end of KBC he used to say that he used to say a line which had Shabba Khair at the end of it
[Guest]: it was quite a flourish. You know actually on our past episode I think
[Guest]: somebody had kind of commented there saying achha this was a Bollywood length
[Guest]: effort like you know why not put in a few song and dance also like you know
[Guest]: Do you sing? Would you like to sing? Exactly. So what I'm going to sing is I'm going to sing like a
[Guest]: line for you which reflects I think the writer's angst but it's also you know
[Guest]: one of my favorite so it's this line from In Custody and Muhafiz right which
[Unknown]: is aaj ek harf ko phir dhoondta phirta hai khayal
[Guest]: right which is the poet writing that I have this pot that is running around
[Guest]: like I mean looking for the right word to land on right I mean so when I kind
[Guest]: of talk in high school sometimes about Indian education systems that obsesses
[Guest]: so much in science and math I kind of keep emphasizing language because the
[Guest]: precision of your thinking is limited by the precision of your language right I
[Guest]: mean and so that's kind of the dominant emotion as I write right because you'll
[Guest]: spend kind of sometimes hours grappling for kind of the right phrase the right
[Guest]: sentence to get something done but yeah so I take that musical box
[Amit Varma]: pichle baar Tamil mein baat kiya, is baar gaana gaaliya. Lovely, amazing. Muhafiz of course was one of the rare
[Amit Varma]: films which Ismail Merchant directed himself instead of his partner James
[Amit Varma]: Ivory doing that. Anything else you'd like to sing? Boss you have a good voice
[Guest]: yaar. So among the unknown things about me is back in high school right I mean I
[Guest]: used to be like you know an inter-school Antakshari champion. So I'm gonna give you a
[Amit Varma]: letter and you got to sing something with that okay. Ho jayega but show pe nahi yaar.
[Amit Varma]: Nahi abhi ek do line ga do. I'll give you a letter. Theek hai kya letter do. Tumhare naam ka letter deta ho.
[Amit Varma]: K. Arre nahi yaar. Like no no no. Don't do this to me. Come on. Come on. Listeners will love it. K. Chalo.
[Amit Varma]: K aur M. I'll give you an option because both are your name only. M say you know so many
[Guest]: songs will start with maam. Nahi nahi nahi. There's no shortage of songs like you know so in fact
[Guest]: see here's the tragedy of my Antakshari past also my teammates there were three
[Guest]: of us okay so the other two had much better voices okay so I was the quantity
[Guest]: guy they were the quality people okay so so my so what I would often do is
[Guest]: essentially when the other team would start singing I would already know what
[Guest]: it's going to end in so I will say achha yeh gaana gaana hai and pass it to my
[Guest]: teammate who had the better voice for that particular song so so I was kind of
[Amit Varma]: the intellectual kind of leader of the team. I'm not letting you get away bro. I'm
[Amit Varma]: sorry this episode is not airing. K aur M. I've given you an option bro. No then you know if I
[Guest]: want to get very melancholic on the K I would say like you know
[Unknown]: Kabhi khud pe, kabhi halat pe, rona aaya, kabhi khud pe. And I say that because you know the halat
[Guest]: have truly been like you know rona inducing so I think part of the problem
[Guest]: was yeah most of my initial songs with K and M were happy songs and I couldn't
[Guest]: automatically bring myself to sing those and I think the halat have been really
[Guest]: hard because you know I had wanted to travel back and I'm not been able to
[Guest]: travel back and you kind of pray every day for safety of friends and family so
[Guest]: yeah maybe maybe all survive and get through to the other side and then
[Amit Varma]: hopefully build a better Indian state. Well the halat may make us cry but you
[Amit Varma]: give us hope so thanks so much Karthik. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: if you enjoyed listening to this episode do visit the show notes and dive into
[Amit Varma]: rabbit holes you can follow Karthik on Twitter at Karthik underscore econ you
[Amit Varma]: can follow me at Amit Verma AMI TV ARMA you can browse past episodes of the
[Amit Varma]: scene in the unseen at seen unseen dot I n thank you for listening
[Amit Varma]: did you enjoy this episode of the scene in the unseen if so would you like to
[Amit Varma]: support the production of the show you can go over to seen unseen dot I n slash
[Amit Varma]: support and contribute any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and
[Amit Varma]: kicking thank you